 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LONG-TERM 
STRATEGY ON 
ENERGY AND 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 2020 2050 
-
 
 
    
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
 
 
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy 
and Climate Change (LTSECC) 
 
Approved by the Government of Andorra on 3 February 2021 
 
 
 
Main authors: 
 
Agency of Energy and Climate Change 
 
Technical team  
Albert Gomà Roca 
Head of the Unit of Energy and Climate Change of the Agency of Energy and Climate Change 
 
Meritxell Cuyàs Lamana 
Anna Boneta Herrero 
Technical experts from the Agency of Energy and Climate Change 
 
Management 
Carles Miquel Garcia 
Director of the Agency of Energy and Climate Change of the Ministry 
of the Environment, Agriculture and Sustainability  
 
 
Ministry of the Environment and Sustainability of the Government of 
Andorra 
Marc Rossell Soler, Secretary of State for the Environment and Sustainability 
Natàlia Rovira, advisor to the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainability 
 
 
 
With the participation of the National Energy and Climate Change 
Committee advisory body 
 
Mayors in representation of the communes: 
 Mr Josep Majoral Obiols, Mayor of Sant Julià de Lòria 
 Ms Rosa Gili Casals, Mayoress of Escaldes-Engordany 
 
Representative of the Department of Territorial Planning on behalf of the Government in the field of building: 
Carles Blasi Vidal, Head of the Public Building Department 
 
Representative of the Department of Mobility on behalf of the Government in the field of mobility: 
Jaume Bonell, Head of the Mobility and Paving Department 
 
Representative of the Department of Business, Trade, Industrial Development and Transport on behalf of the Government in the field of transport and 
industrial safety: 
Josep Lluís Pujol Carrascosa, Director of Business, Trade, Industrial Development and Transport 
 
Representative of the Department of Educational Systems and 
School Services on behalf of the Government in the field of 
school transport: 
Joan Marc Guàrdia Llorens, Head of the Unit of Educational 
Planning and Schools 
 
Representative of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Florència Aleix, Director of Multilateral Affairs and Cooperation 
 
Representative of Andorran Electric Forces (FEDA): 
Albert Moles Betriu, Director de FEDA 
 
Representatives of the four distribution companies (Nasa, 
Mútua, EE and Sercensa): 
Yolanda Palmitjavila, President of AESE  
 
Representative of the Association of Electricity, Plumbing and 
Air Conditioning Companies of Andorra (Adelca): 
Edgar Francome Martínez, President of Adelca 
 
Representative of the Association of Fuel Importers and 
Distributors (AIDC): 
Carles Visent Guitart, Member of the AIDC 
 
Representative of the Andorran Association of Architects 
(COAA): 
Albert Villamajor Rosados, Member of the COAA 
 
Representative of the Andorran Association of Technical 
Architects of the Principality of Andorra (COATA): 
1  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Jaume Rifà i Giribet, President of the COATA 
 
Representative of the Andorran Association of Engineers 
(COEA): 
Vicenç Jorge Seco, Member of the COEA 
 
Representative  of  the  Andorran  Association  of  Work 
Contractors (Acoda): 
Mònica Dalmau Gamarra, Manager of Acoda 
 
Representative of the Andorran Association of Estate Agents 
and Property Managers (AGIA): 
Jordi Ribó Casanovas, Vice-President of the AGIA 
 
Representative  of  the  Andorran  Chamber  of  Commerce, 
Industry and Services: 
Jordi  Duró  Espineta,  Member  of  the  Andorran  Chamber  of 
Commerce, Industry and Services 
 
Representative of the Andorran Business Confederation: 
Miquel Àngel Armengol, Vice-President of the Andorran Business 
Confederation 
 
Representative of the university and research sector: 
Jordi Llombart Pubill, technical expert from the Department of Higher 
Education and Qualification Recognition  
 
Representative of the innovation sector: 
Marc Pons Pons, Director of ActuaTech 
 
Representative of the Automobile Club of Andorra: 
Enric Pujal Torres, President of the ACA 
 
Representative of the two associations for the protection of 
nature (ADN and Apapma): 
Jordi Deu, technical representative of ADN and Apapma 
 
Representative of the Andorran National Youth Forum: 
Marta Calsina, Member of the Andorran National Youth Forum 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years Andorra has endowed itself with a set of resources and 
instruments to demonstrate its willingness to support the international 
commitments acquired in 2015 under the Paris Agreement. 
The objectives and initiatives established in Law 21/2018 of 13 September 
on the promotion of the energy transition and climate change (Litecc) and 
the 2020-2050 Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change should 
lead to a decrease in greenhouse gas emissions and ensure carbon 
neutrality is achieved by 2050. 
As the experts explain, mountainous areas are among the first to notice 
the effects of climate change. Andorra, where the signs are already 
noticeable, is a particularly vulnerable country due to its dependence on 
snow tourism, which is why it’s essential for it to make a firm undertaking 
to prevent an increase of more than 1.5ºC (compared to pre-industrial 
levels) by the end of the 21st century. 
For this reason, the set of actions launched in recent years and the short 
and mid-term objectives are ambitious and will hopefully lead to a decrease 
in  emissions  while  promoting  an  improvement  in  the  quality  of  the 
environment, with benefits related to human health and a positive impact 
on the prevention of potential natural hazards stemming from climate 
change.  
 In 2020 Andorra was one of the first countries in the world to update its 
nationally determined contribution with a document by means of which 
countries can demonstrate their efforts to reduce national emissions and 
adapt  to  the  effects  of  climate  change.  The  above  once  again 
demonstrates the importance of Andorra’s commitment to the fight against 
climate  change.  Similarly,  on  23  January  2020,  the  General  Council 
approved the Agreement on the acknowledgement of the climate crisis and 
the declaration of the state of climate and ecological emergency, which 
tasks the Government with different actions in this area. 
Some initiatives are already having an impact on our reality, such as the 
confirmed increase in the contribution of renewable energies to the national 
energy package. The actions triggered by the Government are necessary 
and the objectives it has set won’t be achieved without a robust, realistic 
and ambitious roadmap. However, we won’t achieve a long-lasting energy 
transition if we aren’t able to secure a real accompanying social transition 
to ensure that everyone in Andorra is informed, aware and capable of 
applying this indispensable change of model to society so as to combat 
climate change. 
 
3  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
 
As Prime Minister Xavier Espot declared on 12 December at the 2020 
Climate Ambition Summit:  
“The Principality of Andorra’s commitment to climate change remains firm 
and, despite the exceptional situation, we’ve worked tirelessly to reinforce 
our fight against climate change. (...) We’re convinced that only  the 
coordination of all our intense efforts will allow us to reverse the current 
trend. Let’s be ambitious!” 
 
Sílvia Calvó Armengol 
 
Minister of the Environment, Agriculture and Sustainability  
 
 
 
 
  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
 
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate 
Change 
 
 
 
Contents 
 
INTRODUCTION 
Contents 
1  Introduction and diagnosis of the current situation 
2  The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change 
3  The Strategy’s action programmes and activities 
  Programme I. Decarbonisation to achieve carbon neutrality: mitigating greenhouse 
gas emissions 
  Programme II. Programme for national action for adaptation to climate change and 
greater resilience 
  Programme III. Programme for the national carbon credit market and other taxation 
tools to achieve carbon neutrality 
  Programme IV. Social transition programme 
  Programme V. Innovation, research and systematic observation 
4  Monitoring indicators 
5  Monitoring and review of the Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change 
6  Relationship between the Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change and other 
national strategies 
 
Annexes to the Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change 
   
Annex 1. Impacts and vulnerability in the face of climate change in Andorra 
Annex 2. Regulatory framework and relationship with the Strategy’s programmes  
   
5  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
1  Introduction and diagnosis of the current situation 
 
 
 
 
 
Evidence of climate change in the Pyrenees and Andorra 
Mountainous territories such as Andorra are particularly sensitive to the effects of climate 
change1. Therefore, although the country’s emissions account for a tiny share of the global total 
(less than 0.001% in 2017), the Long-Term  on Energy and Climate Change must set the path 
towards implementing firm, decisive and immediate climate action that integrates the initiatives 
required to achieve a territory which is more resilient to this climate challenge. 
A recent study titled Climpy2 shows how the evolution of the average temperature in the 
Pyrenees has been +0.24ºC/decade and the evolution of the average annual rainfall has 
totalled -1.87% between 1959 and 2015 (according to the 1981-2010 reference period), and that 
these impacts have been most noticeable in summer and spring in terms of temperature and in 
winter and autumn in terms of rainfall.   
The same study also evaluates the trend of the snow cover in the Pyrenees. Overall, the study 
highlights the fact that the snow cover decreased between 1958 and 2017 and that the most 
noticeable reduction can be detected above an altitude of 2,100 metres. One of the analyses 
carried out within the framework of this study addresses the evolution of the days with snow cover 
via satellite images and, although there is no statistically representative data history, a certain 
downward trend can be observed. 
Similarly, one of the main conclusions drawn by this study is that it is essential to continue with 
the systematic observation of these climate indicators.  
According to the results of the study, the upward trend in the temperature will persist with different 
intensities  during  the  21st  century  (depending  on  the  evolution  of  the  greenhouse  gas 
concentrations) and, in any event, the maximum daily temperature is expected to increase 
by between 4ºC and 6.3ºC with respect to the average values for the 1986-2005 period, 
while the rise will total between 3.2ºC and 4.9ºC for the minimum temperature. 
In the specific case of Andorra3, as demonstrated by the climate data on annual average 
temperatures and rainfall in the 1950-2019 period under study (Chart 1), the average annual 
temperature has risen by +0.21°C/decade and, if we analyse this evolution over the last 50 years 
(1970-2019), the increase is even more remarkable, totalling +0.36ºC/decade. The average 
annual rainfall has fallen by -22.01 mm/decade since 1950 (Chart 2). 
                                                           
1 High mountains are some of the areas particularly sensitive to the effects of climate change, according to the fourth 
report (2007) published by the IPCC (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change).  
2 Study conducted by the Pyrenean Climate Change Observatory (OPCC); this is a cross-border territorial cooperation 
initiative on climate change launched in 2010 and headed by the Pyrenees Working Community (CTP), seeking to monitor 
and understand the phenomenon of climate change in the Pyrenees. This initiative enjoys the support of the Government 
of Andorra, together with the Pyrenean regions of the two neighbouring countries. 
3 According to the data provided by FEDA’s Central and Ransol weather stations and processed by the Andorran 
Meteorological Service.  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
 
Charts 1 and 2. Evolution of the anomaly of the average annual temperature and rainfall in Andorra (1950-2019) according to the 1981-2010 reference period.  
Source: the authors, based on the data from two weather stations (Central and Ransol) 
 
The annual climate bulletins published by the National Meteorological Service contain updated 
data on climate anomalies in the Principality and related events. 
Upon the basis of the results of the PAAC (participatory process for the adaptation of Andorra to 
climate  change)  in  2014  and  the  foundations  of  scientific  knowledge  of  the  impacts  and 
vulnerabilities of the Pyrenees in the face of climate change4, Annex 1 lists the main impacts and 
associated vulnerabilities for the socio-economic and biophysical sectors and indicates the 
degree of prioritisation resulting from the above-mentioned participatory process. The set of 
identified impacts have been grouped together as much as possible to obtain an overall diagnosis 
to facilitate analysis of the situation. 
The most recent studies carried out within the framework of the Pyrenean Climate Change 
Observatory serving to identify the chief impacts and vulnerabilities in the face of climate change 
(Annex 1) include the Canopee project, which, following on from the Bosc project, has provided 
an assessment of the impact on the forest masses by means of the phenological observation of 
different species, the evolution of the defoliation and the distribution by climatic areas. The main 
results worth highlighting are that climate change can lead to changes in structure, composition, 
health  status,  areas  of  geographical  distribution  and  vulnerability  to  external  phenomena 
(pathogens, climate phenomena, etc.). 
In addition, the Florapyr project, a continuation of the Biodiversity project of the Pyrenean Climate 
Change Observatory (2011-2014), has led to an updated version of the Atlas of the Flora of the 
Pyrenees and triggered a device to monitor Pyrenean snowdrifts. The results show how the flora 
and vegetation of the Pyrenees are likely to be affected by climate change, with consequences 
both for the maintenance of this exceptional heritage (species, communities, landscapes and 
living conditions) and for the value of the resources they constitute. 
Finally, the Replim project has characterised the impact of climate change on high mountain 
wetlands and aquatic ecosystems particularly vulnerable to the above effects. Climate change in 
the Pyrenees will affect the ability of these ecosystems to be carbon sinks and regulators of the 
quantity and quality of the water in the safeguarding of biodiversity. 
The purpose of the Piragua project currently underway is to analyse the hydric resources in the 
Pyrenees and identify the main problems and the adaptation initiatives to be undertaken. This 
issue is particularly sensitive in a territory such as Andorra due to the multi-sectoral nature of the 
uses of this resource. 
 
 
 
                                                           
4Study Climate change in the Pyrenees: impacts, vulnerabilities and adaptation (2018), conducted by the Pyrenean 
Climate Change Observatory (OPCC). 
7  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Active commitment in the face of climate change 
Given that the effects of climate change are already perceptible, the set of actions defined by the 
Strategy are not only goals to be achieved in the long term, but also short and mid-term objectives, 
given the urgency of the need to act on a global scale. 
The commitments currently made at a global level in the field of mitigation propose a future 
scenario very different from the objective defined by the United Nations Framework Convention 
on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC),  namely  preventing  any  rise  in  temperature  beyond  2ºC 
(compared to pre-industrial levels) by the end of the 21st century. However, the scientific 
community has emphasised the importance of taking the action required to prevent any rise in 
global warming beyond 1.5ºC with respect to pre-industrial levels and the international call to 
overcome this challenge is increasingly intense. 
Andorra therefore supports the implementation of the actions envisaged in the Paris Agreement 
entailing a reduction in domestic greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions until carbon neutrality is 
achieved5. In addition, in domestic terms, reducing emissions will lead to an improvement in the 
quality of the environment, with benefits for human health and a positive impact on the prevention 
of the potential natural risks associated with climate change. In both cases the goal is to ensure 
better quality of life for present and future generations. At the same time, the energy transition 
must allow the creation of a new ecosystem that promotes high added value activities, thus 
improving the diversification of our economy. 
The Strategy establishes the mid and long-term goals and is sustained by the updates of the 
Principality’s nationally determined contribution (NDC), a statistic which demonstrates its efforts 
to reduce its domestic emissions and adapt to the effects of climate change in accordance with 
the Paris Agreement (article 4, paragraph 2). 
 
NDC of A Strategy
     
Subsequently, on 17 April 2019, the Council of Ministers approved the National Strategic Plan for 
the implementation of the United Nations 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, which 
complements these international objectives and transfers them to a national level.  
                                                           
5 These actions are specified in the nationally determined contributions (updated in 2020) declared to the Secretariat of 
the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
National Law 21/2018 of 13 September on the promotion of the 
energy  transition  and  climate  change  (Litecc)  establishes  the 
energy-related future of Andorra and defines its objectives in the 
area of climate change, while, more recently, on 23 January 2020, 
the  General  Council  approved  the  Agreement  on  the 
acknowledgement of the climate crisis and the declaration of the 
state of climate and ecological emergency, which tasks the Government with different actions in 
this area. 
In response to these commitments and the above-mentioned regulations, the Long-Term Strategy 
on Energy and Climate Change is Andorra’s roadmap for addressing climate change and 
increasing its resilience to its effects while, in terms of emissions, it will seek carbon neutrality in 
keeping with the Horizon 2050. To achieve this goal, the Strategy also seeks to reduce the carbon 
footprint6 of the sectors in the country that emit these gases. 
Annex 2 of the Strategy outlines the national and international regulatory contexts in greater 
detail and is correlated with the objectives, milestones and programmes that have been set. 
 
Characterisation of the greenhouse gas emission and absorption sources 
 
The calculation of the GHG emissions is based on the information available and is subject to a 
process of continuous improvement, in such a way that it should be understood that the GHG 
emission values lack accuracy but enable us to assess the relative importance of each sector 
with regard to the entirety of the emissions and therefore identify the areas of action to be 
prioritised. The calculation is performed in accordance with the guidelines defined by the 
International Panel of Climate Experts for the determination of the national inventories. However, 
given the systemic vision that this Strategy seeks to provide, the information on GHG emissions 
expands its scope to emissions that are not included in the national inventories, e.g. emissions 
related to the production of electricity beyond national borders. 
According to the data for 20177, about 600 Gg CO -equivalent are emitted in Andorra and the 
2
country’s sinks absorb 23% of them (the sink capacity of the forest mass is almost -140 Gg CO -
2
equivalent/year). However, these data are obtained by calculating all the fuels sold in the country8 
but, if only emissions produced by domestic traffic are taken into account, the emissions actually 
attributable to the activity carried out within the territorial boundaries amount to approximately 340 
Gg CO -equivalent and the absorption by the sinks totals 40%. 
2
In terms of emissions per inhabitant and year, the values in Andorra stand at around 4.6 tonnes 
of CO -equivalent9 (a value lower than the average for European countries (6.8 tonnes of CO -
2 2
equivalent per person and year) and those of the neighbouring countries (5.44 and 5.12 tonnes 
of CO -equivalent per person and year in Spain and France, respectively)10. 
2
Chart 3 shows that the energy sector emits more than 95% of GHG emissions (about 570 Gg 
CO -equivalent/year11) and that approximately 56% is produced due to the consumption of 
2
mobility-related fossil fuels, 23% corresponds to the consumption of fossil fuels in buildings (the 
                                                           
6 The carbon footprint is the total amount of greenhouse gases (GHGs) directly or indirectly emitted due to human activity. 
7Data drawn up upon the basis of the national GHG inventory submitted in the third biannual update report in compliance 
with the UNFCCC, to which the GHG emissions related to the consumption of imported electricity are added to assess 
the country’s total carbon footprint.  
8 With high demand for fuel tourism. 
9 Indicator calculated according to the census population (source: Department of Statistics of the Government of Andorra) 
and GHG emissions, without taking fuel tourism into account. 
10 Source: Fossil CO & GHG emissions of all world countries, EDGAR (2017). The data in the report are indicators for 
2
2016. 
11 A gigagram (1 Gg) is equivalent to 1,000 tonnes. 
9  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
commercial, institutional and residential sectors) and 17% to electricity consumption and energy 
production. Moreover, the forestry and other land use sector absorbs approximately 23% of the 
emissions generated, while the country’s forest mass, which covers 40% of the territory’s surface 
area, is the chief absorber of these emissions (-140 Gg CO /year). 
2
 
 
Charts 3 and 4. Source of the GHG emissions in 2017, taking into account all the emissions produced by mobility (left) and only internal mobility (right). 
(Source: the authors, based on the data from the national GHG inventory) 
One characteristic feature of energy consumption in Andorra is the significant influence of fuel 
tourism, in other words, the amount of fossil fuels for road transport sold in Andorra but actually 
consumed in the neighbouring countries. If we integrate the data obtained from the analysis of 
the evolution and composition of traffic in the country showing that approximately 76% of fuels for 
road transport are consumed outside Andorra,12 the data change significantly. Despite the fact 
that the energy sector remains the main source of GHG emissions (Chart 4), the forests’ capacity 
to absorb GHG emissions accounts for almost 40% of the emissions actually generated in the 
country. Approximately 23% of emissions correspond to the consumption of mobility-related fossil 
fuels, 40% correspond to the consumption of fossil fuels in the residential, commercial and 
institutional construction sector and 29% of the emissions correspond to electricity consumption 
and energy production. 
Therefore, the management of the energy sector and the forest mass within the territory 
gives rise to two key elements of Andorra’s contribution to the fight against climate change. As 
a result, the strategic policies must be geared primarily, albeit not exclusively, towards achieving 
key objectives in these two sectors. 
Carbon neutrality entails a balance between GHG emissions and carbon sequestration in natural 
ecosystems such as forests, the main carbon sinks currently in existence in Andorra. The 
importance of the ecosystem services and so-called “nature-based solutions” is thus highlighted. 
The cross-cutting nature of energy and its global importance mean it is essential to fully integrate 
the energy policies into the future strategies, prioritising the sustainable development of our 
economy and society.  
As for energy sources, 80% of electricity is imported13 (see Chart 5, which shows the sources of 
electrical power in the country), as well as almost 100% of thermal energy and any which is 
required for mobility. This leads to external dependence totalling more than 90% of the total 
energy demand, constituting a risk to the energy supply in the event of potential fossil fuel price 
                                                           
12 Source: Analysis of the evolution and composition of traffic in Andorra (1990-1995-2000-2005-2010-2012) conducted 
by DOYMO (2014).  
13 Source: FEDA (https://www.feda.ad/energia-i-meteo/energia)  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
crises and generating uncertainty and vulnerability for the national economy. As shown in Chart 
5, almost all the energy produced in Andorra comes from renewable sources.  
 
 
Chart 5. Energy source (source: the authors, based on data from the Office of Energy and Climate Change (2019) 
 
 
 
It should be emphasised that, although the consumption of fuels for road transport constitutes 
one of the main sources of GHG emissions, the trend since 2010 has displayed a certain 
stabilisation in terms of consumption, despite a continuous rise in the size of the fleet. This 
situation is the result of the enhanced technology within the sector, albeit a very incipient one, 
and the arrival on the market of electric vehicles, which accounted for 568 of the total of 81,284 
(47 electric vans, 443 electric cars and 75 electric motorbikes), is more visible, with the respective 
percentages in each category totalling 1.2%, 0.73% and 0.51%. 
 
 
 
11  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
2  The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate 
Change 
 
 
 
 
 
The  Long-Term  Strategy  on  Energy  and  Climate  Change  Whatisit?
implements article 10 of Law 21/2018 of 13 September on the  It is the instrument that allows the 
promotion of the energy transition and climate change (Litecc). It  planning, coordination and 
rationalisation of the actions, 
has been drawn up by the Ministry of the Environment, Agriculture  measures and projects to combat 
and Sustainability (to which the Agency of Energy and Climate  climate change and the 
achievement of the goals of Law 
Change  reports)  and  reviewed  within  the  framework  of  the  21/ 2018 of 13 September on the 
National Energy and Climate Change Committee. In addition, to  promotion of the energy transition 
and climate change (Litecc) in a 
support the global movement towards carbon neutrality, Andorra  way that is binding on the Public 
contributes to the general efforts to achieve the above by  Administration.
2050 by significantly increasing the targets set by the Litecc.  
The commitment to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 is a highly ambitious goal given the current 
GHG emissions within the territory, although it is regarded as a minimum commitment objective 
to be achieved. If the global situation and the technology available in the future make a reduction 
beyond this commitment possible, the achievement of a more ambitious fall will be pursued with 
the aim of reducing emissions below the territory’s sink capacity.  
The activities may be aimed at specific sectors such as energy, mobility, agriculture and waste 
management and include different sectors to address more cross-cutting issues such as the 
promotion of the circular economy, changes in our consumption habits, the promotion of research 
in the above areas and the inclusion of new concepts in the sensitisation of all the citizenry. 
The main objectives set out in the Strategy are: 
  Achieve carbon neutrality by 2050: 
2030
37% reduction in non-absorbed emissions with regard to the BAU (business as 
usual) scenario
2050
Carbon neutrality
 
 
  Reinforce resilience to the effects of climate change by means of a national climate 
change adaptation plan.  
The Strategy is expected to be reviewed at least every six years in order to adapt it to new 
technical, economic and social knowledge and any new obligations arising from the international 
situation, depending on the achievement of the objectives established in each area. Therefore, 
the path towards carbon neutrality, taking into account each of the planned reviews of the 
Strategy, should be as follows (Chart 6).   
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
 -37% with respect to 2005 
-29% with respect to 2017 
Neutrality 
 
 
Chart 6. Evolution of GHG emissions and periods for the review of the National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change to 
achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 
 
 
The Strategy consists of five action programmes and seventeen activities to meet the 
emis sion  reduction  targets  for  achieving  neutrality  by  2050,  developing  a  climate  change 
adaptation plan to address the current and projected situation, structuring a funding system to 
carry out the planned actions, sensitising, educating and training the population and performing 
the research and innovation tasks required to understand and respond to the new environmental 
and technological challenges. 
Based on the above diagnosis and bearing in mind that 95% of GHG emissions come from the 
energy sector, the Strategy’s first programme must focus on decarbonising this sector as well as 
other equally strategic sectors with fewer emissions (programme I). At the same time, given that 
the effects of climate change in Andorra are already noticeable (see section 1 titled Evidence of 
Climate Change in the Pyrenees and Andorra), it is essential to work on adapting to this 
phenomenon to reduce risks and improve the country’s resilience (programme II). 
In order to achieve the mitigation and adaptation objectives it is vital to anticipate their financing 
system, as a result of which the programme for the national carbon credit market and other 
taxation tools has been created to contribute to bearing the cost of the implementation and 
functioning of the activities envisaged in the Strategy (programme III). 
Finally, it is important to emphasise that this is a relatively recent problem with a significant degree 
of uncertainty and, therefore, the mechanisms to promote innovation and research must always 
be reinforced to implement the most advanced technologies and continue with a systematic 
observation  of  the  phenomena  that  occur  in  order  to  readjust  the  planned  activities 
(programme IV). 
 
However, it will not be possible to make a paradigm shift in the energy sector and the fight against 
climate change without the implementation of a social transition allowing the education, training, 
sensitisation and empowerment of society as a whole with regard to the importance of these 
strategic goals and the changes in habits required to achieve them (programme V).  
Each of the above-mentioned programmes is broken down into a set of activities that will be 
conducted in different actions. The Strategy has a set of indicators, as shown in Section 4 titled 
Strategy Indicators. The set of programmes and specific goals for the decarbonisation programme 
are shown in the following image: 
 
 
 
13  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Programme for 
the national  Programme of 
Adaptation to 
carbon credit  Innovation, 
Descarbonisation  climate change  Programme of 
market and other  research and 
programme and greater  social transition
taxation tools to  systematic 
resilience
achieve carbon  observation
neutrality
 
 
Mobility: Buildings: Electricity:
2030 2030
Reduction of 50%  2030 33% electricity 
internal emissions from  consumption from 
mobility Cosnumption  national productioni 
reductions of  40% 100% imported 
20% electric vehicles  electricity zero 
(turisms) emissions
2050 2050 2050
Descarbonisation Descarbonisation 50% electricity 
consumption from 
national production
 
The set of programmes also permits a response to the regulatory framework and international 
commitments in the area, as well as the challenges concerning adaptation and the fight against 
climate change detected in the Pyrenees. Annex 2 schematically displays the relationship 
between the Strategy and this national and international regulatory framework. 
 
  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
3  The Strategy’s action programmes and activities  
 
 
 
 
 
The five (5) programmes and the seventeen (17) activities planned are as follows:  
I.  Decarbonisation to achieve carbon neutrality: national action programmes to mitigate greenhouse 
gas emissions 
 
1.  Energy transition  
2.  Sustainable, connected and safe mobility 
3.  Agriculture and forest management respectful towards the territory’s sink capacity  
4.  Circular economy  
5.  Industry and use of industrial products 
 
II.  National action for adaptation to climate change and greater resilience 
6.  Plan for adaptation to climate change  
7.  Promotion of nature-based solutions for greater resilience 
 
III.  Programme for the national carbon credit market and other taxation tools to achieve carbon 
neutrality  
8.  National carbon credit market and renewable energy 
9.  Green Fund and other taxation tools 
 
IV.  Social transition 
10. Sensitisation and dissemination regarding carbon neutrality  
11. Educational transition  
12. Training to achieve carbon neutrality 
13. User information and protection  
14. Participation of the different agents in the process to achieve carbon neutrality 
 
V.  Innovation, research and systematic observation 
15. Innovation  
16. Research and knowledge transfer 
17. Systematic observation  
 
 
 
  
Programme  I.  Decarbonisation  to  achieve  carbon  neutrality:  mitigating 
greenhouse gas emissions 
 
The  Strategy  seeks  carbon 
neutrality by 2050. The concept of 
carbon neutrality has increased the 
awareness of a wide range of actors 
in light of the challenge of combating climate change, thus facilitating the empowerment of all the 
agents in this stage of the transition, a process essential for adapting to and dealing with this 
climate phenomenon. 
In Andorra, the far-reaching decarbonisation of the energy sector is a key condition for achieving 
the most demanding objectives in the fight against climate change, given that this sector accounts 
for 95% of the country’s global GHG emissions. Within this sector, approximately 56% of 
emissions correspond to energy consumption associated with mobility (23% if only internal 
mobility is included) and 24% to the energy consumption of buildings (40% if only internal mobility 
is included). 
15  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Therefore, the decarbonisation programme (I) sets out the energy transition required to 
reduce energy consumption, improve energy efficiency and promote energy production from 
renewable sources, among other targets. Similarly, decarbonisation also encompasses a shift of 
model towards more sustainable, connected and safer mobility. The National Sustainable 
Mobility Strategy therefore needs to be developed. 
Although the other economic sectors account for less than 5% of domestic GHG emissions and 
given that the mitigation actions often represent synergies with each other, the decarbonisation 
programme also aims to boost the circular economy as a new economic model for promoting 
savings on resources, chiefly materials, energy and water, and generating fewer emissions than 
the linear consumption models developed until now. Similarly, actions are planned in the field of 
industry and the use of products. 
As for the primary sector, contrary to what occurs in most countries which is responsible for a 
significant part of the emissions, there is a radically different situation in Andorra, as the forest 
management sector is the only existing CO  sink. Approximately 23% of the GHG emissions 
2
emitted are absorbed by the forest mass, which covers 40% of the country’s surface area 
(191 km2). Therefore, in order to achieve carbon neutrality, the Strategy includes agricultural 
and forestry management to ensure the maintenance and improvement of the country’s 
sink capacity.  
 
Activity 1.  Energy transition 
 
The main objectives in terms of the energy transition are the improvement of the electricity sector, 
the  promotion  of  renewable  energies  and  high-efficiency  energy  technologies  and  the 
encouragement of energy savings and energy efficiency, particularly in construction. More 
specifically, the set of activities envisaged for each of these sectors are summarised below. 
As for the promotion of energy production from renewable sources, 
 
it is essential to promote new investments to develop the existing 
production potential in the country  by means of the forecasts   13.8 GWh/year 
established  in  the  Sectoral  Plan  for  Energy  Infrastructures 14 
(PSIEd’A) in terms of solar power, hydraulic energy and biomass    146.3 GWh/year 
use.  The  production  potential  of  these  renewable  sources  in 
 19.7 GWh/year 
accordance with the Plan is chiefly based on the production of 
photovoltaic energy, followed at a considerable distance by energy 
   154.1 GWh/year 
production based on hydraulic power and the use of forest biomass, 
in such a way that the diversification of energy production is pursued 
at the same time. At the time of the writing of the PSIEd’A the potential for wind energy production 
was also studied and estimated at 67.4 installed MW and production totalling 154.1 GWh/year, in 
accordance with the technologies available at the time of the study (2017) and the locations 
deemed most suitable from the point of view of production, execution costs, the environmental 
impact, etc. The deployment of this technology must also be the subject of sectoral planning, in 
accordance with the provisions of the Qualified Law on the delimitation of the powers of the 
communes.  
The Strategy must promote the evolution of the energy system towards internal production on 
large, medium and small scales with the encouragement of self-consumption and electricity 
production from exclusively renewable sources. Therefore, Law 21/2018 stipulates the granting 
of aid for the promotion of distributed electricity generation and self-consumption, while the 
provisions of Law 21/2013 specify aid for the acquisition and installation of equipment for micro-
cogeneration and electricity generation using renewable sources. 
                                                           
14 The Sectoral Plan for Energy Infrastructures in Andorra was approved by the Government on 16 May 2018.   
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
In this regard, it is possible to study tools to promote the self-consumption of electricity, including 
relocated consumption based on the establishment of an “energy transport toll” allowing electricity 
to be generated by an owner and consumed at another point in the territory as if it were its own 
energy in exchange for paying a toll for the cost of transporting the energy to the point of 
consumption. 
In the specific case of the exemplary role of the communal public administration, the Litecc states 
that the communes must work on creating a value chain based on the management of the 
communal forest masses for energy use, thus primarily covering the thermal needs of their 
buildings. 
Buildings are a key factor in energy consumption for driving the energy transition, as they are 
some of the chief consumers of electricity and fossil fuels. The implementation of energy saving 
and efficiency measures in the building must be guaranteed at the time of the design of the 
buildings and during their use. To this effect, sufficient regulations must be implemented to ensure 
that  newly-built  homes  have  nearly  zero-energy  consumption  and  incorporate  a  minimum 
percentage of in-situ energy production based on renewable sources, adapting the urban 
planning  regulations  if  necessary.  As  for  the  new  housing  stock,  the  resulting  plan  must 
encompass the possibility of implementing centralised heat networks in the action units in the 
phase prior to the building projects, in such a way that it will be necessary to adapt the urban 
planning regulations to include these energy studies in the planning phase. In the case of the 
existing housing stock it is important to maintain and further the momentum of energy renewal 
and refurbishment by means of aid programmes and preferential funding systems. One example 
is the aid for the refurbishment of the housing stock (the Renova programme); a large part of this 
line of aid is intended for energetic improvements to the stock in existence since 2011. This 
programme should also focus on the refurbishment of buildings in a more unfavourable energy 
situation and thus encourage energy improvements in often older buildings that have poorer 
energy ratings. 
The Public Administration has an exemplary role to play in creating a new model of energy 
consumption and, therefore, lighting systems and public buildings must meet energy efficiency 
criteria and have high-efficiency production systems or renewable energy sources, especially 
those produced in situ. In order for public buildings to guarantee the transition to carbon neutrality 
during their operation, the Litecc envisages integrating the position of the energy manager into 
the public operational organisation charts. Energy audits in heated buildings are a mandatory tool 
of the Litecc, in such a way that the planning of the execution of all the audits required 2022 is an 
action that needs to be expedited. 
As well as the energy consumption of public buildings, any work or service must apply energy 
efficiency criteria. 
It is therefore necessary to encourage companies to implement environmental management 
systems within the framework of their corporate responsibility, integrating GHG emissions and, 
therefore, energy efficiency into their operations and including these voluntary systems in the 
criteria for assessing public tenders or providing tools for calculating GHG emissions within 
organisations, such as the dissemination of the simplified emission calculation tool that the 
Government provides free of charge. 
 
Activity 2.  Sustainable, connected and safe mobility 
 
The mobility sector accounts for 56% of GHG emissions and internal mobility is responsible for 
approximately 24% of the emissions produced by this sector, according to the data for 2017. For 
this reason it will be necessary to develop a national mobility strategy with the aim of reducing 
emissions and respecting the hierarchy in the prioritisation of transport systems established in the 
Litecc; firstly, it will be essential to prioritise public transport and promote motorised or assisted 
17  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
non-public mobility (walking, cycling, etc.) and, secondly, electric motorised mobility without a 
source of GHG emissions.  
With the aim of reducing the consumption of fossil fuels in transport, it will be necessary to study 
alternative means of transport (e.g. cable transport) interoperable with each other and accessible 
in terms of mobility and economic competitiveness. In addition, according to the Litecc, the 
administrations, public entities and companies with more than one hundred workers must have a 
sustainable mobility plan for their workers, according to the hierarchical criteria mentioned above. 
These plans should evaluate the possibility of reducing travel by means of reorganisation and 
changes in operation such as teleworking. These mobility plans must provide the necessary 
elements to promote the use of bicycles when travelling, such as having indoor parking or 
charging points for electric bicycles. 
The experience of the pandemic caused by COVID-19 in 2020 has shown how policies to restrict 
mobility, which have forced the implementation of teleworking or reduced mobility to essential 
minimum levels, could mean the country witnesses a 52% reduction in GHG emissions if they are 
maintained throughout a year (see Chart 7), taking into account domestic mobility, fuel tourism 
and the reduction in electricity consumption. This reduction in GHG emissions is accompanied by 
an improvement in air quality, especially with the reduction of NO  levels, with values 70% lower 
2
than usual. Although this situation is not a desirable one, the post-COVID-19 policies must take 
into account the connection between health, air quality and climate change, in such a way that 
positive experiences need to be drawn from them, assessing the possibility of incorporating those 
that allow us to better reconcile the impact on GHG emissions and the maintenance of the 
economy into mobility habits.  
 
 
  Chart 7. Comparison of annual GHG emissions with and without COVID-19 (source: the authors, based on  data on the reduction of mobility and electricity 
consumption in the Principality during the 2020 lockdown) 
 
The promotion of electric mobility should facilitate the energy transition with a reduction in 
dependence on fossil fuel consumption; therefore, these actions must be accompanied by an 
increase in the percentage of renewable sources in the country’s energy mix (see activity no. 1). 
Ultimately, renewable energies should be promoted to have greater presence in mobility.  
The electrification of mobility requires an increase in the vehicles of this type in both the private 
and public mobile fleets and the implementation and management of the charging infrastructures 
for these vehicles must be continued; the aim is to have a fully interoperable and compatible 
national network and for both publicly and privately owned car parks for public use have these 
infrastructures. It is vital to ensure that the public parking spaces for cars and bicycles have 
publicly or privately owned connection elements for electric vehicles in buildings, not only on the 
public highway. In this regard, the implementation of a regulation that establishes the conditions 
for the transmission of electrical energy and the possibility of the Administration creating a  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
mediator and informative campaigns for residents’ associations and individuals who want to 
execute these facilities may be tools to secure the implementation of these infrastructures and 
private investment in this sector. 
Similarly, the possibility of modifying the urban planning regulations governing public car parks 
must be studied to increase the degree of demand for the availability of spaces for new 
constructions, in keeping with the aim of introducing electric vehicles. 
With regard to the Administration’s fleet of vehicles, care must be taken to ensure that 100% of 
the cars purchased are EVs or ones that don’t produce GHG emissions, with the exception of 
those that cannot be adapted due to service safety requirements. This criterion must be included 
in any new contractual specifications for this type of product. 
With regard to aid for the improvement of the energy efficiency of the vehicle fleet, in 2014 the 
Government approved the Engega Plan, an aid programme which has assigned financial support 
to the acquisition of rechargeable electric and hybrid vehicles since 2016. Although this aid 
programme has caused a relatively insignificant change in the total mobile fleet (0.73% of cars 
were electric vehicles in 2019), the Plan is thought to be causing a shift in consumption habits 
towards vehicles emitting fewer GHGs and thus encouraging the electric vehicle market. The Plan 
needs to popularise the use of the electric vehicle, especially with regard to internal travel in the 
country, and concentrate efforts on vehicles intended for logistical purposes with more intense 
use than private ones. 
However, aid for sustainable mobility should be diversified and potential allowances or premiums 
associated with the implementation of charging points or the promotion of individual journeys on 
foot or by PMVs (personal mobility vehicles without emissions) should be studied via Andorra’s 
public transport integrating platform (Mou_T_B) or any other.   
 
With regard to public transport, distribution logistics, urban waste collection, the construction 
sector and new piste-grooming machines, among other types of vehicles, it will be necessary to 
ensure a transition to a model with fewer or zero emissions, using other technologies such as 
those based on green hydrogen15. 
Activity 3.  Agriculture and forest management respectful towards the territory’s sink 
capacity  
 
The agricultural and livestock farming sectors account for less than 2% of the total GHGs (2017), 
so actions in this sector are not aimed at mitigation but rather at promoting production to boost 
the consumption of local food and thus reduce food waste and emissions associated with food 
transport. It is currently estimated that the meat products provided by the country’s livestock 
farmers generates about 1,500 tonnes of food marketed through wholesalers, butchers and 
restaurants. This amount accounts for approximately 15% of the meat consumed in the country.  
Given the uncertainty generated by the current climatic circumstances, the preservation of 
traditional systems that have adapted over time is essential. Extensive livestock farming is not 
only able to adapt to climate change but it also helps to mitigate it as a result of its relationship 
with the environment and the ecosystem services provided by grazing in the form of maintaining 
the forests, the main sinks in Andorra. 
In this regard, it is estimated that the forest mass of Andorra is able to absorb 23% of GHG 
emissions (2017), in such a way that managing the forests properly and ensuring adaptive 
forestry  as  a  nature-based  solution  allowing  the  maintenance  and  improvement  of  the 
                                                           
15 Green hydrogen, unlike grey hydrogen, is produced using water and electricity from renewable sources. Once produced, 
it can be stored or used; it recovers energy in the form of heat through direct combustion with oxygen (1) (in the case of 
hydrogen engines) or in the form of electricity by means of a fuel battery (2). O the other hand, grey hydrogen is produced 
by bringing methane and water to high temperatures, resulting in hydrogen and carbon dioxide, to which the emissions 
from the production of heat required for the reaction must be added.  
19  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Principality’s sink capacity is a key element within the actions to be implemented as part of the 
Strategy. 
Law 7/2019 of 7 February on the conservation of the natural environment, biodiversity and the 
landscape attributes a multi-functional role to the forest masses (which occupy more than 40% of 
the country’s surface area) in the environmental and economic fields, due to their productive and 
regulatory role in the biological cycle, its function as a reservoir for biodiversity, its ability to protect 
the soil from erosion and its social function in aspects related to leisure, recreation and the 
landscape.  
More specifically, Law 7/2019 recognises the forest masses as the main GHG sink in Andorra 
and recommends managing them as such in response to the global obligations arising from the 
UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement. Section V regulates the management of the Principality’s 
forest masses and establishes communal forest management plans as basic instruments for 
regulating them. These plans should preferably incorporate the demand anticipated for the 
thermal energy needs of the communal buildings into the forest management planning. In this 
regard, the Sectoral Plan for Energy Infrastructures in Andorra also provides for the use of 
biomass energy by means of these forest management plans and considers that the management 
must ensure their maintenance and improve the sink capacity. 
In any event, the current sink capacity of the territory is calculated upon the basis of the available 
data and variables, often national bibliographic sources or other from nearby territories, which 
outline the most representative scenario of Andorra’s forest mass. Within the framework of the 
drawing up of the national GHG Inventory and in accordance with the guidelines of the IPCC of 
2006, this estimate must be continuously improved and therefore it will be necessary to make a 
systematic observation of the variables that are determined essential to better allocate the 
Principality’s sink capacity. This task is included in the innovation, research and systematic 
observation programme (V).  
 
Activity 4.  Circular economy  
 
After 20 years of the implementation of the National Waste Plan that was approved 
in 2001 with objectives set for 2020, it can be stated that the goals set out in the 
Plan have been achieved and the country’s waste management complies with the 
European regulations. Currently, however, in the fields of waste and other areas of 
production and consumption it’s necessary to change the model and move towards 
a circular economy allowing significant savings in the consumption of raw materials, energy and 
water. Work is therefore already underway on the drafting of a circular economy bill and a circular 
economy strategy to be implemented in tandem with it. The general objectives will be to reduce 
the consumption of materials in relation to the GDP and minimise food  waste and waste 
generation in general.  
This regulation will also implement obligations on labelling requirements in relation to GHG 
emissions from different products and services. 
More specifically, the construction sector is a key sector for the reuse of materials such as residual 
forest biomass for the generation of new building materials. It is therefore appropriate to explore 
the possibilities in this regard. Similarly, subsidies for products designed to optimise their useful 
life and to be as efficient as possible, such as the most efficient tyres and the reuse of tyres of 
heavy goods vehicles by means of retreading leads to reductions in GHG emissions. 
Potential allowances or taxation tools should be studied in order to promote these initiatives. 
 
 
  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
Activity 5.  Industry and use of products  
 
The industrial sector accounts for less than 2%16 of the country’s gross domestic product and its 
share of GHG emissions is small in comparison with other countries (less than 2.5%). However, 
we must not forget the importance of ensuring the development of a green economy with high 
value added industries based on clean and sustainable technologies and giving increasing 
characterisation to this sector in order to specify the appropriate mitigation measures to be 
undertaken and have a sector which is better prepared for the future changes that may occur, 
such as the increase in competition for hydric resources, the regulation of the use of certain 
products with heating power, etc. 
The above also applies to the use of products such as refrigerant gases, solvents, foaming 
agents, aerosols, etc. There is limited knowledge of the use of these products and, therefore, the 
related  diffuse and fugitive emissions, and,  although no consumption that could generate 
significant GHG emissions is expected due to the type of economy and size of the country, it is 
important to identify the emitting sources so as to define the actions to be implemented. 
Therefore, an initial set of actions in this sector require better identification and characterisation 
of these emission sources and the continuity of the line of work that has been carried out so far 
to reduce the consumption of gases with high warming potential that have already led to 
international agreements, such as the Kigali Amendment to the Montreal Protocol to the Vienna 
Convention. 
The proper implementation of the Vienna Convention and its protocols has had positive effects in 
terms of achieving the objectives of the UNFCCC. Carbon dioxide (CO ) is the best-known 
2
greenhouse gas, but there are others that have a much higher potential greenhouse effect that 
are of industrial origin, including hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulfur 
hexafluoride (SF ). The development of HFCs was a consequence of the Montreal Protocol as a 
6
response by the chemical companies to address the ban on the use of ozone-depleting CFCs 
and HCFCs. 
Therefore, the Kigali Amendment, the latest amendment to the Montreal Protocol, seeks to 
progressively reduce HFCs, which, while not being harmful to the ozone layer and accounting for 
only a small percentage of the GHGs.in the atmosphere, have an impact a thousand times greater 
than that of carbon dioxide, due to their global warming potential. These gases are chiefly used 
in air conditioning and cooling appliances, which are therefore one of the sectors that this Strategy 
will strive to improve in terms of the quantification and qualification of the gases used in them. 
The reduction schedule of the Kigali Amendment for countries such as Andorra (parts classified 
as “Non-article 5”) stipulates that the reduction phase should begin in 2019 and a reduction of 
85% should be achieved in its baseline by 2036. 
Achieving these reduction objectives entails having a good strategy that envisages both the 
technical aspects associated with the use of a new generation of refrigeration gases and the 
essential associated administrative and regulatory adaptations within a context of cooperation 
with the chief national economic sectors most affected. 
This activity is closely related to the 2017-2030 Atmospheric Environment Strategy. 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
16 Source: Department of Statistics, 2018 
21  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
 
Programme II. Programme for national action for adaptation to climate 
change and greater resilience 
 
The impacts caused by the increase in the frequency and 
intensity  of  extreme  weather  phenomena  and  the 
progressive  changes  in  the  climatic  conditions  of  the 
Pyrenees are already noticeable in Andorra (see section 1 
and annex 1). Therefore, the Strategy envisages a national action programme for adaptation (II) 
to climate change that increases the resilience of the socio-economic and environmental sectors.  
 
Activity 6.  Plan for adaptation to climate change 
 
On an international scale the UNFCCC acknowledges the vulnerability of all countries to the 
effects of climate change. Although the adaptation processes received less attention than the 
efforts to mitigate GHGs during the first years of the Convention, the need to work on adaptation 
issues has acquired greater prominence since the publication of the third IPCC Evaluation Report 
(2001) and all the signatories of the Convention agree that it is of vital importance. In 2010, during 
the COP16, the process for the national adaptation plans (NAPs) was established to enable the 
parties to identify their mid and long-term adaptation needs with the aim of developing strategies 
and  programmes  to  respond  to  said  needs  (the  Cancun  Adaptation  Framework).  The 
development of the adaptation plans should be an ongoing, progressive, iterative, participatory 
and transparent process. 
The participatory process for the adaptation of Andorra to climate change (PAACC) was carried 
out in 2014 with the aims of identifying the potential impacts of climate change on the socio-
economic and environmental sectors, assessing the vulnerabilities of each of them and identifying 
the adaptation measures to address them and reduce their vulnerability. Annex 1 lists the chief 
impacts and associated vulnerabilities for the socio-economic and biophysical sectors and 
indicates the degree of prioritisation resulting from the PAACC.  
Upon the basis of this work and the information contained the recent report updating the bases 
of the scientific knowledge with regard to the impacts and vulnerabilities facing the Pyrenees in 
terms of climate change titled Climate change in the Pyrenees: impacts, vulnerabilities and 
adaptation (2018) performed by the OPCC2 project, Annex 1 lists the main impacts and 
associated vulnerabilities for the socio-economic and biophysical sectors and indicates the 
degree of prioritisation resulting from the PAACC. The set of identified impacts have been 
grouped together as much as possible to obtain an overall diagnosis to facilitate analysis of the 
situation. 
The scientific consensus in relation to the main challenges facing the Pyrenees in terms of climate 
change, as indicated in the above-mentioned OPCC2 report, is directly correlated with the set of 
impacts identified for the different sectors in Annex 1 for Andorra and are as follows:  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
 
1.  Prepare the population to cope with extreme weather 
2.  Increase safety in view of the natural risks 
3.  Support the actors from the territory in the event of water scarcity and droughts 
4.  Guarantee the quality of the surface waters and groundwater 
5.  Maintain the tourist appeal of the Pyrenees 
6.  Address the changes in crop productivity and quality and capitalise on the emerging opportunities 
7.  Anticipate irreversible changes in the landscape 
8.  Consider the potential loss of biodiversity and changes in the ecosystems 
9.  Adapt to the imbalances between energy supply and demand 
10.  Address the increased spread of diseases, pests and invasive species 
   
 
These challenges are taken into account when defining the Long-Term Strategy on Energy and 
Climate Change and, in particular, will need to be incorporated when a climate change adaptation 
plan is defined for the country. 
The United Nations recommends that the NAPs include four general and cyclical components: 
(1) assessment of the impacts and associated vulnerabilities and risks, (2) drawing up of the 
adaptation plans, (3) implementation of the measures and (4) monitoring and evaluation of the 
adaptation.  43 measures were identified (table 1) in the 2014 process, of which more than 30% 
are currently under development. However, it will be necessary to update some of the actions 
envisaged in the PAACC in order to plan them in terms of time and funding and integrate them 
into the policies, plans and programmes of the administrations, making it easier to transfer them 
to the private sector.  
 
     
Typology of measure  Number of measures  Thematic field 
   
Planning  15  Hydric resource, 
energy, tourism, 
natural risks and 
mobility 
Operational  10  Agriculture and 
livestock farming, 
health and energy 
Regulation  5  Natural spaces, 
landscape, 
renewable energies 
and hydric resource 
Research and studies  5  Natural spaces, 
landscape and 
natural risks 
Sensitisation   3  Hydric resource, 
energy and natural 
risks 
Financial instruments.  5  Tourism and natural 
risks 
 
Table 1. Number of actions per typology of the PAACC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Involve the  greatest 
possible n umber of 
intereste d actors
 
 
Facilitate the  Evaluation, 
provision of financial  impacts,  Increase sensitisation 
and technological  vulnerability  and ambition 
support and risks
Monitoring 
evaluatahntedio  n of  Adapplatnatsion 
adaptation
Reinforce technical  Imopnle omf ethneta ti Promote a political 
and institutional skills adaptation  space for 
measures commitment
 
 
 
 
Share info rmation 
and kno wledge
 
 
 
 
Image 1. Adaptation cycle under the climate change regime of the United Nations17 
 
For the implementation of the PAACC, the impacts of climate change on the territory of the 
Principality were identified upon the basis of previous scientific work carried out in Andorra and 
the Pyrenees as a whole within the framework of the cooperation project of the Pyrenean Climate 
Change Observatory (OPCC)18. To ensure that the adaptation measures are consistent and 
suited to the real and foreseen changes in the territory, it’s necessary to continue studying the 
impact and vulnerability in terms of climate change and to identify and calculate the indicators 
required to monitor it properly. 
The OPCC, with funding from members of the CTP and the Poctefa programme, is currently 
developing a Pyrenean strategy for adaptation to climate change as part of the Adapyr project19 
(due to be completed in 2022), in such a way that this document will also constitute a basic tool 
for defining Andorra’s plan for adaptation to the effects of climate change. 
In order to plan the actions, priority will be given to studies in the health, agriculture, energy and 
tourism sectors, as stipulated by the Litecc. To carry out these studies, the Government will rely 
on the country’s research and investigation centres and cross-border territorial cooperation 
initiatives addressing climate change (without ruling out other potential collaboration). 
 
Activity 7.  Promotion of nature-based solutions for greater resilience 
 
If biodiversity and the ecosystems are protected and managed sustainably, they can offer a wide 
range of services. The sustainable management and restoration of the ecosystems can generate 
                                                           
17  https://unfccc.int/topics/adaptation-and-resilience/the-big-picture/what-do-adaptation-to-climate-change-and-climate-
resilience-mean. 
18 The Pyrenean Climate Change Observatory is a cross-border territorial cooperation initiative on climate change 
launched in 2010 and conducted by the Pyrenees Working Community (CTP) that seeks to monitor and understand the 
phenomenon of climate change in the Pyrenees. 
19 Project of the Interreg V-A programme for Territorial Cooperation between Spain, France and Andorra (Poctefa 2014-
2020).  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
social, economic and environmental benefits (e.g. use of the forest biomass), improving the 
exploitation of natural resources and protecting the ecosystem services that stem from them.  
Well-preserved ecosystems have a cushioning effect on the climate and can help to reduce the 
risks and impacts of extreme weather events such as storms, avalanches and floods, the 
frequency and intensity of which will be exacerbated by climate change. Preserving and restoring 
wetlands and riverbank vegetation are solutions that can reduce the intensity of flooding and the 
damage it causes and protect hydric resources during droughts.  
Protected natural areas are among the privileged tools for conserving biodiversity in the face of 
the main threats and for maintaining the ecosystems’ potential for resilience and adaptation. They 
are therefore receiving increasing recognition as effective, economical and sustainable tools for 
combating climate change and acting as carbon sinks. 
As a result, it is important to envisage measures to prevent the loss of habitats and to manage 
and control invasive species and those most vulnerable to the effects of climate change. The 
conservation and expansion of protected areas must ensure the maintenance of biodiversity in 
the future. These areas must remain connected internally and with cross-border areas of interest 
in order to allow certain species to move around in the event that future climatic conditions oblige 
them to do so to survive (a factor of particular importance in mountainous areas where the 
differences in altitude are significant).  
The protected area management plans must incorporate aspects of vulnerability and sensitivity 
to the effects of climate change and, as appropriate, schedule actions to restore and recover the 
ecosystems and ecosystem services regarded as priorities. Mechanisms must be provided to 
ensure  that  these  plans  incorporate  the  results  of  the  monitoring  and  associated 
recommendations (see Programme V, Innovation, research and systematic observation) in 
the decision-making processes during the land planning management. 
More specifically, the mountain forests help to stabilise the soil and provide protection against 
avalanches and landslides, as well as being CO  sinks. Older and more mature forests are 
2
thought to be able to store greater amounts of carbon above the ground (in the trunk and 
branches) and underground (in the roots), but a well-managed forest (with suitable clearings) 
further optimises their ability to absorb CO . 
2
Identifying the factors that condition the sink capacity of the forest mass and defining the 
management criteria to be integrated into the different management tools for these areas to 
optimise said factors are key to improving GHG absorption. 
Green spaces also play an important role in urban areas, as they help to combat the effects of 
heatwaves and cool the air while improving its quality. In addition, reducing the waterproofing of 
cities helps to minimise the risk of flooding, facilitates the infiltration of rainwater into the soil and 
restricts surface runoffs. In this regard, it’s essential for the urban planning regulations and parish 
urban development schemes to allow the creation of green roofs and façades, taking into account 
the limitations imposed by cultural heritage protection and the promotion of natural green public 
spaces and streets with a greater density of vegetation. Similarly, the use of rainwater is also an 
important element to be borne in mind for the maintenance and management of these spaces, 
given the potential scarcity of this resource in the future. 
The traditional extensive livestock farming system developed in the Principality has a positive 
impact on the territory because it indirectly contributes to the cleaning of the forests and 
mountains, thus minimising the risk of fires and promoting biodiversity. It also naturally fertilises 
the soil, so there is no need to use synthetic fertilisers. The mowing of the meadows at the bottom 
of the valley, an activity inherent to livestock farming, is important for the landscape and it also 
has a positive impact on biodiversity. Encouraging these traditional activities is therefore a 
significant measure to be maintained and prioritised. 
25  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
In the same vein, the more extensive implementation of other crop alternatives could be studied, 
ones based on the application of permaculture techniques to minimise the sector’s emissions, 
maintain the richness of the soil, use water efficiently and so on; in short, sustainable agriculture. 
Nature-based solutions constitute an economically viable and sustainable alternative which is 
often  less  costly  than  technological  investments  or  the  construction  and  maintenance  of 
infrastructures in the long term. 
Therefore, the consolidation of a territorial management model that takes into account the 
protection of biodiversity and the extension and enhancement of the forest mass and the 
ecosystem services20 will improve the Principality’s resilience to mid and long-term changes.  
 
 
Programme III. Programme for the national carbon credit market and other 
taxation tools to achieve carbon neutrality 
 
To implement all the actions envisaged for decarbonisation to achieve carbon 
neutrality and the actions required to ensure proper adaptation to the planned 
changes, the Strategy includes the programme for the national carbon credit 
market and other taxation tools (III) to sustain the Green Fund created by the 
Litecc. 
 
Activity 8.  National carbon credit and renewable energy market 
 
The creation of a voluntary and regulated emission offset system entails the adoption of innovative 
initiatives in the field of GHG emission mitigation. The implementation of this system is key to 
supporting organisations, entities and companies within the framework of social, corporate and 
entrepreneurial responsibility, as it facilitates the offsetting of their carbon footprint and the 
approval of policies to combat climate change in its operation. Similarly, the articulation of a 
national GHG emission offset system can serve to encourage and coordinate disperse activities 
related to the environment to be conducted by institutions and companies. For this system to be 
reliable it is essential to create the foundations to ensure the full transparency and integrity of the 
carbon credits that enter the system. Therefore, in parallel with the creation of the emission offset 
system, it will be necessary to determine a carbon standard that demonstrates the environmental 
integrity of the carbon credits generated by the different projects and the creation of a credit 
registry system that clarifies the ownership of the credits and their traceability. 
More specifically, with regard to the energy system, mechanisms must be created and the 
necessary instruments must be provided for the certification of the origin of the electrical power 
as an incentive to use renewable energies in the field of electricity with the aim of transmitting and 
marketing this renewable energy by means of guarantee of origin certificates to validate that it is 
100% renewable. 
To promote the offsetting of GHG emissions, a straightforward tool must be provided to facilitate 
the simplified calculation of the emissions generated by users who may be interested in them, 
either at home or in economic activities in the private sector or activities conducted by the public 
sector. 
Within the framework of international commitments, it should be borne in mind that although the 
Paris Agreement doesn’t explicitly refer to the offsetting of GHG emissions, article 6.4 provides 
for the creation of a new mechanism to support countries in reducing their emissions and 
                                                           
20 The ecosystem services are generated upon the basis of the functions inherent in the ecosystems and generate benefits 
for society by improving the economy and the quality of life of people. Ecosystem services that generate provisions of 
resources and others of a regulatory or cultural nature or supportive of the above can all be identified.  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
promoting sustainable development and acknowledges the possibility of the parties voluntarily 
participating to enable them to be more ambitious; therefore, it sets out certain principles that 
must be complied with, including transparency, environmental integrity and solid accounting. 
These principles must be taken into account when designing a national carbon credit market. 
In this regard, in October 2020, the Government approved its support for the San Jose Principles 
Coalition for High Ambition and Integrity in International Carbon Markets established in article 6 
of the Paris Agreement. 
 
Activity 9.  Green Fund and other taxation tools 
 
The Government promotes the Green Fund to encourage plans and actions for the development 
of climate change mitigation and adaptation initiatives. This Fund, as stipulated by the Litecc, is 
incorporated into the draft general budget law and is sustained by any earmarked taxes that are 
determined for this purpose, as well as the complementary budgetary allocations provided for in 
the State’s general budget laws, the donations and contributions it receives and any other 
potential income. At the same time, the acknowledgement of the climate crisis and the declaration 
of the state of climate and ecological emergency promoted by the General Council (2020) 
establishes that the proceeds from the tax on vehicle ownership also sustains said Fund. 
Decision 1/CP.21 of the Paris Agreement recognises the need, among other measures, to provide 
incentives to reduce emissions by means of instruments such as national policies and carbon 
pricing. In this regard, the regulation of carbon taxes may lead to increases in the prices of fossil 
fuels, reducing pollution and encouraging the business sector and consumers to choose cleaner 
and more affordable options. Specifically, the proposal involves creating a price for carbon as an 
additional element of the general branch of the excise tax on hydrocarbons whose use generates 
or is likely to generate greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Gradually integrating the CO  element 
2
would internalise the social and environmental costs of the negative effects of fossil fuel use and 
improve the competitiveness of other less polluting energy sources. Ultimately, the chief goals of 
a tax such as this one are to send out a price signal to the economic agents and improve the 
competitiveness of other less polluting counterparties. 
These taxes can sustain the Green Fund and other mechanisms for distribution and a return for 
the citizenry can be studied in the future. This Green Fund should serve to financially sustain aid 
programmes such as the Engega Plan and the Renova Programme, as well as other aid 
programmes created to promote mitigation and adaptation initiatives associated with climate 
change and activities related to the purposes of Law 21/2018. 
Similarly, the issuance of green bonds that seek to implement projects for climate change 
mitigation or adaptation by public and private institutions that are qualified to manage them must 
allow funding to be obtained from investors interested in carrying out plans that would be more 
difficult to execute without this fiscal mechanism. These bonds must also comply with the 
transparency and publicity guidelines required for carbon credits and 100% renewable energy 
certificates.  
Lastly, the implementation of energy efficiency criteria for other national taxes and communal 
levies must be studied and, if necessary, the regulations should be adapted to apply them and 
allocate the revenue to climate change mitigation and adaptation projects around the county and 
in the parishes. In this regard, it will be necessary to study the possibility of subsidising buildings 
that go beyond the regulatory requirements and achieve the characteristics of passive buildings. 
27  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Programme IV. Social transition programme 
 
Technological progress is 
not enough to limit GHG 
emissions  so  as  to 
achieve carbon neutrality, 
and therefore the transition to a low-carbon economy cannot be solely technological, which is why 
the Strategy includes a social transition programme (IV) on individual, collective and professional 
scales. 
Society must receive the necessary information by means of dissemination and sensitisation 
to achieve carbon neutrality and an appropriate educational transition must be performed to 
generate a future society aware of the importance of the effects of climate change and individual 
influence  in  achieving  carbon  neutrality.  The  Strategy  also  schedules  the  training  of  the 
professional sector, a key element in the execution of actions within the framework of the energy 
transition (energy efficiency, renewable energy production, etc.). 
Although the citizenry is aware of the phenomenon of climate change, to ensure that the 
decarbonisation initiatives related to energy, mobility and the economy are clear and transparent 
and allow them to act consciously, the Strategy envisages user information and protection to 
provide them with sufficient tools to enable them to make their decisions as active agents with 
opinions and good judgement. 
However, in order for the social transition to be real and close to the needs and concerns of 
society, the programme includes the participation of the different actors in the process to 
achieve carbon neutrality and ensures that there is institutional reinforcement and the structure 
and resources required to ensure its functionality.  
 
Activity 10.  Sensitisation and dissemination regarding carbon neutrality  
 
The transition towards a low GHG emission economy is not only a technological transition and 
one of research and innovation, it also entails a change in the habits of citizens (how we move, 
work, consume, etc.). The role of consumers becomes a key element in ensuring that the 
transition towards carbon neutrality is a success. Individual decisions when it comes to choosing 
a home or food or purchasing a vehicle have a direct impact on the carbon footprint of society as 
a whole.  
Some widespread lifestyles around the world, such as long-haul international flights and the 
generalisation of a meat-rich diet, etc. have an environmental impact and until now technological 
progress has not been enough to limit their effect on the generation of GHGs (among other 
environmental impacts), in such a way that the selection of lifestyle choices can make a real 
difference in terms of the speed at which society can make the transition towards carbon 
neutrality. 
In view of the above, it’s important for society to obtain the right information and education so as 
to make individual decisions with regard to their habits and lifestyles and how they influence 
society as a whole on the path towards carbon neutrality. For this reason, thematic initiatives such 
as the holding of international events like Energy Week and other specific actions including Earth 
Hour and the celebration of historical milestones such as Andorra’s accession to the UNFCCC 
are important for maintaining and improving the content and the scope of the target audience. It 
is also important to make more technical activities available to the public, such as the international 
and Pyrenean conferences and the international seminars on climate change conducted by the 
OPCC which, thanks to remote tools, enable more people to gain access to them and extract the 
information they regard as relevant in keeping with their interests.   
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
From the standpoint of changing the mobility model, it is important to tell users how their actions 
can affect GHG emissions, in such a way that informing them about how their emissions can be 
reduced if they travel on foot or in a PMV via the country’s mobility applications such as Mou_T_B 
is a channel that requires study. 
Furthermore, information on the social and economic importance of the ecosystem services and 
the need to adapt to future climate scenarios will also lead to a positioning closer to the climate 
reality of society in the face of the management policies that are applied. In this respect, it is vital 
to obtain more information on our environment and study it to ensure that it is accessible and 
understandable to the citizenry or any specific public. 
However, one of the key elements in terms of sensitisation to reach the citizenry is the business 
world. Its involvement in sensitisation and outreach initiatives also demonstrates its corporate and 
entrepreneurial  social  responsibility  and  the  organisations  allow  contact  with  the  different 
employment stakeholders who wouldn’t otherwise be easily accessible, including suppliers, 
customers, etc. 
 
Activity 11. Educational transition  
 
The educational transition must permit the drawing up and implementation of training and 
educational actions in the fields of climate change and energy, particularly with a view to 
disseminating the available information on the effect of social positioning on all the socio-
economic sectors and biodiversity and the associated ecosystem services and the capacity for 
future adaptation with the purpose of enhancing the citizenry’s knowledge to facilitate conscious 
decision-making. 
The training tools must be adapted to the educational sphere and pedagogical resources must 
be created and updated in keeping with the available information. It is therefore crucial to include 
the climate dimension in school syllabuses. The ministry responsible for education will ensure the 
sensitisation and education of the country’s school population with regard to climate change and 
the national action in accordance with this Strategy. 
More specifically, in the case of higher education it will be necessary to cover the climate 
dimension in the syllabuses of state higher education qualifications within the cross-cutting 
competence related to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and, more specifically, the 
syllabuses developed by the Bachelor’s Degree in Educational Sciences. 
In addition, the climate neutrality of schools should be included in the Green Schools project as a 
goal for the participants. The schools’ energy audits are a basic tool for this objective; they must 
be planned in accordance with the deadlines defined by the Litecc (by 2022) in order to ensure 
sufficient resources. 82% of the country’s schools were affiliated to the Green Schools programme 
during the 2018-2019 academic year and the aim is for all the public and denominational schools 
to join it.  
The set of educational sustainability initiatives must be aligned with the future environmental 
education strategy for sustainability, as well as the future Pyrenean environmental education 
strategy, which is currently being drafted as part of the Interreg-Poctefa project (ADNPYR)21. It is 
worth noting that this Pyrenean education strategy to achieve sustainability will include a specific 
axis related to encouraging the involvement of the Administration and society in climate change 
mitigation and adaptation. 
 
                                                           
21 ADN Pirineus, a project for the valorisation of Pyrenean heritage and cooperation with the Pyreneus Vius Education 
Network. 
 
29  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Activity 12. Training to achieve carbon neutrality 
 
Professionals from the energy sector are key players in the transition, which is why it is 
essential to plan training for technicians engaged in the refurbishment of buildings, the installation 
of energy production systems from high-efficiency renewable sources, electrical mobility and 
other more cross-cutting energy sectors such as energy management and audits. Training and 
retraining programmes must be designed for the professionals in these sectors, ensuring the 
quality of the training provided, adaptation to the current regulations and their full attendance. 
To design these training programmes it will be vital to collaborate with the country’s higher 
education institutions in order to create ones that abide by the principles of the EHEA (student-
centred learning and programmes defined by competences and learning outcomes), measured 
in accordance with the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS) and quality 
standards. 
The professionals’ training must lead to the creation of a more competent business environment 
that offers qualified work in the energy sector and consolidates said sector as having potential for 
economic growth. 
Furthermore, within the Administration, the development of the tools, plans and programmes 
for the mitigation of and adaptation to climate change will require updated and enhanced 
institutional and vocational training in order to develop new skills, such as planning in accordance 
with  unstable  climate  scenarios,  and  apply  institutional  adjustments  to  facilitate  the 
implementation of the identified measures.  
In this respect, during the international process for the analysis and consultation of the reports 
issued within the framework of the UNFCCC conducted by climate change experts held every two 
years, a set of skill development requirements are identified to improve the characterisation of 
GHG emissions and specify and optimise the most suitable mitigation and adaptation initiatives. 
One of the tools to be implemented is a programme to enhance skills and competences related 
to adaptive forest management and the management of natural areas and the biodiversity most 
vulnerable to climate change. 
 
 
Activity 13. User information and protection  
 
According to the Litecc, user information and protection are becoming key elements in the field of 
climate change. Empowering consumers requires informing them so that they can make their 
decisions as active agents with opinions and good judgement. This user empowerment will mean 
the energy policies can be implemented more effectively as a result of the citizenry’s decisions, 
in such a way that the citizenry will drive the energy transition. 
At the same time, making information available to consumers constitutes a defence of their rights, 
which is why the information must be clear, understandable and transparent. The creation of 
public registries providing rapid access to the information is an important process that requires 
implementation. 
However, general speaking and without limitation, users should be able to obtain information on 
the following data: 
-  The contribution of each energy source to the electricity they consume. 
-  The energy consumption of the properties they live in and public buildings. 
-  The energy efficiency ratings of the properties they live in.  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
-  Consumption and CO  emissions and the rate of ownership of new and second-hand 
2
vehicles for sale. 
-  The energy efficiency of new household appliances that are marketed. 
Energy can be regarded as an essential resource, particularly in mountainous areas and in winter. 
It will therefore be necessary to ensure the quality and reliability of the energy supply by means 
of a regulation that determines the criteria, to identify users who are liable to suffer from energy 
insecurity and to provide information to companies and entities within the energy sector on how 
to act in the above cases. These initiatives must be accompanied by a protocol of action to be 
applied by the Public Administration in the event that it becomes necessary to protect users. 
 
Activity 14. Participation of the different agents in the process to achieve carbon neutrality 
 
To ensure the participation of the key players in the strategic energy and climate change policies 
for achieving carbon neutrality, the Litecc (with the unanimous approval of the General Council) 
has created the National Energy and Climate Change Committee (CNECC). The Committee 
has a particularly important role to play in the evaluation and monitoring of the national Strategy 
outlined  in  this  document.  This  Committee  is  made  up  of  representatives  of  the  Public 
Administration, the private sector and the third sector of the Principality, including the National 
Youth Forum of Andorra, which was also a promoter of the acknowledgement of the climate crisis 
and the declaration of the state of climate and ecological emergency.  
In order to give greater scope to the envisaged participation in the above-mentioned strategic 
policies, the Committee will approve the creation of the work sub-committees required to 
facilitate the evaluation of the proposals and concerns of the different actors with regard to 
initiatives under development or in operation, such as the future National Mobility Strategy. 
Given that the CNECC is an inter-ministerial committee, this organisation must improve the 
coordination between the ministries so as to facilitate the prior implementation of the standards 
by the Public Administration as an exemplary act.  
Similarly, to deploy the Litecc it will be vital to obtain the collaboration of the different agents from 
the  public  and  private  sectors  and  formalise  said  collaboration  by  means  of  cooperation 
agreements if deemed necessary, In this respect, there are currently several working groups 
involved in the area of mitigation, such as the one that focuses on energy efficiency in buildings, 
with the participation of the Andorran Association of Architects and the Andorran Association of 
Engineers,  and  the  one  that  focuses  on  vocational  training  in  the  energy  field,  with  the 
participation of the Association of Electricity, Plumbing and Air Conditioning Companies and the 
Andorran Association of Engineers. There is also the working group involved in the area of 
adaptation, made up of research institutions from the country such as the Institute for Andorran 
Studies. These working groups will have to be updated and expanded as part of the development 
of new adaptation and mitigation initiatives, in accordance with the topics that need to be worked 
on. 
The results generated by these working groups may be reported at the meetings of the CNECC 
if said Committee so requests. 
As for the Public Administration, any public procurement of works, supplies or technical services 
will have to apply efficiency criteria, in such a way that all the public agents from the central and 
communal administrations must be involved in the integration of the actions to achieve neutrality 
when it comes to defining the bases of the new technical and administrative specifications 
regulating the awarding of the above procurement. 
Finally, it is important to bear in mind the possibility of creating crowd-funding projects in the 
areas  of  mitigation  and  adaptation  in  which  any  individual,  company  or  organisation  can 
participate in order to implement plans to promote the fight against climate change. These projects 
31  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
can be launched via a private or public platform and the Administration must promote policies 
aimed at facilitating the development of initiatives in this regard. These projects also acquire an 
added value in terms of sensitisation and dissemination. 
 
Programme V. Innovation, research and systematic observation  
 
Lastly, it should be borne in mind that the technologies are 
evolving very rapidly and that it is urgent to apply the most 
advanced ones for decarbonisation and adaptation to the 
phenomena  of  climate  change;  the  application  of  these 
technologies requires their subsequent evaluation by means of the indicators that are defined. In 
view  of  the  above,  the  Strategy  envisages  the  innovation,  research  and  systematic 
observation programme (V).  
To ensure that the transfer of all the information generated by this programme is useful and 
practical, it will be essential to anticipate how the results will be disclosed and how the different 
players that implement and execute the mitigation and adaptation initiatives within the territory 
will be involved. 
 
Activity 15. Innovation  
As established by the Litecc, the Public Administration must promote innovation, and, to do so, it 
will be necessary to encourage interaction among the different agents in the economic and 
scientific  systems  so  that  they  can  study,  evaluate  and  determine  the  usefulness  and 
appropriateness of certain technologies and measures. It is therefore intended to authorise pilot 
tests to implement new technologies, particularly within the energy sector. In this regard, a key 
element that needs developing is a value chain associated with the use of hydrogen and other 
energy sources such as synthesis gas obtained from renewable energy sources as potential 
energy for achieving carbon neutrality, particularly within the transport sector and other sectors 
that are difficult to decarbonise. These forms of energy also allow storage, which is why they can 
constitute an excellent alternative for storing electrical power from renewable sources and 
subsequently transforming it into electricity or directly using it as fuel.  
One platform that promotes these tests is made up of living labs and care must be taken to include 
real research and innovation in the fight against climate change. 
 
 
Activity 16. Research and knowledge transfer 
 
The activities envisaged within the Strategy’s programmes will have an impact on the mitigation 
of GHGs, which are expected to total 21% by 2030 in comparison with the emissions in 2017 
(equivalent to a 37% reduction in global emissions with respect to a static scenario for 2030) and 
77% by 2050 compared to 2017, thus achieving climate neutrality. Achieving carbon neutrality 
requires contributions from all the sectors, especially those entailing higher energy consumption, 
in order to guarantee a sustainable energy transition and maintain the reduction in emissions over 
time. 
Therefore, research and the development of new products, technologies and work methodologies 
are key to achieving the goals set by the Strategy and international commitments. 
One of the lines of research regarded as a priority is the optimisation of the sink capacity of 
different ecosystems in the country, taking into account the integration of their ecosystem values 
and the climate neutrality goal which is set.  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
However, it is not only necessary to conduct research to optimise the reduction of emissions, we 
must also adapt more effectively and become more resilient. Therefore, the research programmes 
in the fields of biodiversity, ecosystems, forest management, health, energy and agriculture must 
be adjusted to prioritise climate factors. 
Climate projections are an important element when it comes to assessing the incidence of climate 
change in the different sectors and, therefore, defining the projections on a more local scale will 
help to improve and adapt the recommendations of the research studies that are conducted. 
One of the lines of applied research that needs prioritising consists of nature-based solutions to 
deal with extreme climatic phenomena, measures that are less costly than the traditional grey 
ones. The success of measures such as forests to ward off avalanches, which enjoy specific 
protection due to their function of reducing risks, has already been demonstrated, but other 
measures, including the treatment of high mountain river courses with nature-based techniques, 
have not yet been sufficiently tested, particularly given the uncertainty of the pluviometric regimen 
in the future. 
The set of results must be transferred in a streamlined way between the actors with planning 
capacity and the researchers, and this information must also reach society as a whole in an 
understandable and useful manner, in such a way that an information exchange platform is 
promoted to bring the research studies closer to the territory’s real mitigation and adaptation 
needs. Knowledge transfer is a key element in the development of new technologies. 
 
Administration 
or agent 
responsible for 
the planning
Citizenry and 
Research 
business 
entity
sector
 
 
Activity 17. Systematic observation  
 
The effects of climate change are already noticeable in the Principality and to improve and 
envisage mitigation and adaptation initiatives in view of this phenomenon it is essential to monitor 
the chief indicators, variables and phenomena that provide the most information and best reflect 
the effects of climate change. 
The Government has identified the information required to draw up the GHG Inventory by decree, 
in  accordance  with  the  forecasts  defined  in  the  methodologies  established  by  the 
Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change  in relation to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). This legislative tool will institutionally enhance the 
management of the systematic observation required to sustain the Inventory, a basic tool for 
steering the mitigation actions to be implemented. 
One of the key variables for achieving the Strategy’s goals is the improvement of the estimate of 
the territory’s sink capacity, which is currently calculated upon the basis of the data and variables 
that are available. Within the framework of the drawing up of the national GHG Inventory and in 
accordance with the IPCC’s 2006 guidelines, this estimate must be continuously improved and 
33  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
it’s therefore essential to systematically observe the variables deemed essential for better 
allocation of the Principality’s sink capacity. Another example would be better characterisation 
and consideration of fuel tourism. 
In addition, the National Energy Registry is the tool for centralised monitoring and control of the 
country’s energy flows. The Registry contains information on the amounts of thermal and electrical 
power produced, distributed, consumed, stored, imported and exported on a national scale. The 
aim of the National Energy Registry is to determine the country’s energy balance from a 
quantitative standpoint in order to provide objective and transparent information in relation to the 
results of the national Strategy and the energy policy. In this regard, one of the improvements that 
should be incorporated is the definition of the emission factors of each energy agent, in such a 
way that the GHG emission estimates made for the national GHG Inventory are more and more 
accurate, in accordance with the IPCC’s 2006 guidelines. 
As well as the climate indicators, among others, it’s essential to envisage long-term supervisory 
and monitoring programmes for the populations of species most sensitive to climate change (e.g. 
those related to snowdrifts) and the control and monitoring of invasive species in order to plan the 
appropriate measures to prevent any loss of habitats. Some cross-border cooperation projects 
such as Phenoclim or Faunapyr generate these kinds of indicators and citizen science is 
becoming increasingly important in maintaining them over time. 
To implement these tasks it will be necessary to obtain the collaboration and cooperation of 
administrative and research institutions (both domestic ones and others from neighbouring 
countries and abroad) One key example of the above is the close collaboration with the Centre 
for Snow and Mountain Studies of Andorra (CENMA) through the Monitoring Committee of the 
Agreement between the Institute for Andorran Studies and the OECC, which should permit the 
organisation of the working groups required to plan and carry out the systematic observation of 
climate change, together with the collaboration with the same institution’s Centre for Sociological 
Research (CRES) so as to obtain information on the perception of the effects of climatic change 
and the population’s anxiety in this matter. 
The  promotion  of  cross-border  and  international  cooperation  for  the  development  of  this 
programme’s activities is of particular  importance.  This is the case of the Adapyr project 
conducted by the Pyrenean Climate Change Observatory previously discussed in programme II, 
which addresses national action for adaptation to climate change and greater resilience. 
The Agency of Energy and Climate Change plays the role of an integrating agent that compiles 
all the information generated and a facilitator that engages the different parties so as to ensure 
that the information resulting from the systematic observation proves useful and allows the 
adaptation of the energy policies and, more generally, those on climate change within the 
Principality. 
 
  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
4  Monitoring indicators 
 
 
 
 
A set of quantitative and qualitative indicators are defined to assess the degree of achievement 
of the objectives set by the Strategy and the need to review and/or modify the associated 
activities. These indicators are summarised in the following table and constitute an essential tool 
for the participation of the National Committee in the monitoring of this Strategy. An assessment 
of the status of the indicators made on at least an annual basis will enable the CNECC to evaluate 
the monitoring and implementation of the Strategy.  
The chief indicators of the energy situation and the fight against climate change in terms of 
emissions and mitigation are listed below as a summary of the current situation for the monitoring 
and implementation of the Strategy. 
       
  Current situation  Objective for  Objective for 2050 
  2030   
 
GHG emissions   600  Gg  CO2- -37% with  Carbon neutrality 
equivalent/year22 (2017)  respect to the 
BAU scenario 
-21% GHG 
emissions23 
Energy intensity   89  TEP/€M  of  nominal  -20%  -30% 
Global  GDP (2010) 
Sink capacity   Approx.  -140  Gg  CO- Maintain the  Improve the territory’s sink 
2
equivalent/year (2017)  territory’s sink  capacity 
capacity and 
improve its 
quantification 
 
 
Decarbonisation programmes to achieve carbon neutrality 
 
National energy production   24% (2018)  33%  50% 
Percentage of national electricity  96% (2018)  >75%  >80% 
Energy 
production from renewable sources  75%  hydraulic,  18%  Increase energy  Maintain the energy 
production 
and distribution by source  waste recovery, 5% LNG  diversification   diversification of 
sector 
cogeneration  and  2%  renewable sources 
photovoltaic 
Percentage of electric propulsion  1% (554 vehicles)  20%  50% 
vehicles in the car fleet in 2020 
Percentage of electric propulsion  -  30%  70% 
Mobility  vehicles in the Administration’s car 
fleet 
GHG emissions produced by internal  80 Gg de CO-equivalent  -50% GHG  Decarbonisation 
2
mobility   (2017)24  emissions 
Reduce the building’s energy    -40%  Decarbonisation 
consumption 
Building  Heated public buildings energetically  Government buildings:  100%  - 
audited until 202025 
                                                           
22 For international purposes the national GHG Inventory presented within the framework of the UNFCCC includes 
information on imported electrical power and the GHG emissions for 2017 total approximately 520 Gg CO -equivalent 
2
(and a balance of 390 Gg CO-equivalent).  
2
23 Or a reduction of 37% with respect to the BAU scenario for 2030. 
24 Taking into account that fuel tourism accounts for 76.1% of the consumption of locomotion fuels.  
25 Both the Litecc and the Agreement on the acknowledgement of the climate crisis and the declaration of the state of 
climate and ecological emergency stipulate that the administrations have to conduct audits of all their heated buildings by 
35  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
31.5%  of  property: 
seventeen  buildings 
audited 
 
Industry    39 Gg CO-equivalent 26  -85% of the HFC  Identify and eliminate 
2
and use of  consumption  fugitive and diffuse 
products  baseline  emissions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Programme for adaptation to climate change and greater resilience 
 
Definition and calculation of a global adaptation indicator (quantitative 
Global adaptation indicator  targets are not set until the first indicator and its calculation become 
available) 
 
Programme for the national carbon credit market and other taxation tools 
 
Implementation and introduction of market credits (quantitative targets 
are not set until the market can operate) 
 
National carbon credit and green energy market   
Implementation and introduction of green energy certificates, 100% 
renewable sources 
Implementation of the Green Fund and evolution of the annual amount 
Green Fund and other taxation tools  in euros allocated to each of the projects related to climate change 
(quantitative targets are not set until the Green Fund can operate) 
Social transition programme 
The citizenry’s perception of climate change as  38.6%    Increase the citizenry’s perception of the 
a more serious problem   (fCirRstE qSu aorbteser rovfa 2to0r2y0 )  problem of climate change  
Families suffering from energy insecurity (user  Reduce the number of families suffering 
0,28% (88 families, 2020)  
protection)  from energy insecurity to 0%  
Innovation, research and systematic observation programme 
 
Definition of climate change indicators to be systematically 
Systematic observation 
followed 
(*)  
 
 
                                                           
2022. The aim is to reduce CO emissions; when these tools become available, a sub-indicator corresponding to the 
2
energy consumption of these buildings will be considered. 
26 Baseline emissions in accordance with the UNEP’s instructions.  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
5 
Monitoring and review of the Long-Term Strategy on Energy and 
 
Climate Change
 
 
 
 
 
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change enables the Government to plan, 
coordinate and rationalise the actions, measures and projects aimed at achieving the objectives 
defined by the Litecc, as well as the long-term goal of carbon neutrality. 
The objectives, actions and measures provided for in the Long-Term Strategy on Energy and 
Climate Change are binding on the Public Administration and are integrated into its sectoral 
planning and programming. The Ministry responsible for climate change will be responsible for 
disseminating the Strategy document to the rest of the Administration and will provide technical 
support for its implementation.  
The Strategy is a public document that must be made available to the public and, as provided for 
by the Litecc, it will be reviewed at least every six years. The approval and subsequent reviews 
will be published in the Official Gazette of the Principality of Andorra.  
The National Energy and Climate Change Committee is the advisory body whose function is to 
monitor the Strategy, as well as to participate in the reviews, modifications and adaptation of its 
objectives. To ensure that it can carry out these tasks, the Committee and the sub-committees 
will receive information on an annual basis to determine the status of the indicators associated 
with each of the programmes and activities identified in the Strategy. 
The Strategy establishes mid and long-term goals and includes the objectives that the Litecc has 
already set for 2030 and 2050. This planning tool will constitute the basis for the updates of the 
Principality’s nationally determined contribution (NDC), a statistic which demonstrates its efforts 
to reduce its domestic emissions and adapt to the effects of climate change in accordance with 
the Paris Agreement (article 4, paragraph 2).  
 
 
 
37  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
6  Relationship between the Long-Term Strategy on 
Energy and Climate Change and other national 
strategies 
 
 
 
 
 
To ensure the proper implementation and suitability of the Strategy, it will be necessary to analyse 
its relationship with other Governmental strategies. Therefore, a search has been conducted to 
identify the main recently approved strategies with a special relationship with the field of climate 
change in accordance with the diagnosis submitted in this document (energy, mobility, agriculture, 
forest management, health, tourism, atmospheric quality, biodiversity, landscape, sustainable 
development, economy, industry, education, research, etc.). 
In  April  2019,  the  Government  of  Andorra  approved  its  National  Strategic  Plan  for  the 
implementation of the 2030 Agenda, in a further step towards making this roadmap a national 
priority and a state project. These sustainable development goals (SDGs) include achieving 
affordable and non-polluting energy (SDG 7), ensuring sustainable cities and communities (SDG 
11) and action on climate (SDG 13). All these SDGs are directly integrated into the Strategy and, 
in particular, are correlated with the following programmes and activities within the Strategy: 
 
   
Sustainable development goals (SDGs)  The  Long-Term  Strategy  on  Energy  and  Climate  Change 
  (LTSECC) 
 
 
Programme  I.  Decarbonisation  to  achieve  carbon  neutrality: 
mitigating greenhouse gas emissions 
         
Programme II. Programme for national action for adaptation to 
climate change and greater resilience 
        
 
Programme III. Programme for the national carbon credit market 
and other taxation tools to achieve carbon neutrality 
    
        Programme IV. Social transition programme 
       
Programme V. Innovation, research and systematic observation 
          
  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
At the 1992 Rio Earth Summit, the two conventions that were drafted focused on climate change 
and biodiversity. In this regard, the 2016-2024 National Biodiversity Strategy of Andorra (ENBA) 
responds to the commitment to the Convention on Biological Diversity, adopted in Rio de Janeiro 
on 5 June 1992, defines how Andorra can contribute to the international objectives regarding 
biodiversity preservation and sets out the guidelines for the management of biodiversity in the 
country. The ENBA is divided into five strategic objectives broken down into 24 activities and 
takes into account that climate change and its effects, such as desertification, bioinvasions, 
deforestation, soil loss, the extinction of species and varieties and the overexploitation of 
resources represent a failure on an international scale and action must be taken to achieve a 
reversal of the trend and a recovery of biodiversity. 
In this respect, we should highlight the following ENBA activities in relation to the Long-Term 
Strategy on Energy and Climate Change and their correlation with the programmes and activities 
within this Strategy: 
 
   
Objectives and activities of the ENBA  The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change 
   
OBJECTIVE 1. INVENTORY THE BIODIVERSITY OF  Programme V. Innovation, research and systematic observation 
ANDORRA  AND  ITS  TREND  AND  IMPROVE 
KNOWLEDGE 
Activities 16 and 17. Research and systematic observation 
Activity 1.4. Identify the factors that may affect 
biodiversity and the state of conservation of the 
ecosystems 
 
OBJECTIVE 3. PROMOTE THE CONSERVATION  Programme I. Decarbonisation to achieve carbon neutrality: 
OF  BIODIVERSITY  IN  NATIONAL  AND  LOCAL  national action programmes to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions 
SECTORAL POLICIES 
Activity 3. Agricultural and forest management respectful towards 
Activity  3.3.  Promote  and  conserve  forest  the territory’s sink capacity 
biodiversity.  The  content  of  the  forest  plans 
should focus on the axes of productive forestry 
(biomass and green economy), protective forestry 
(erosion,  environmental  services,  river  basins, 
forest health), forestry for the conservation of 
biodiversity (mixed masses, strong biomass, old 
forests, relict spaces, etc.) and adaptive forestry 
(climate change, CO fixation) 
2
 
OBJECTIVE 5. GOVERNANCE AND COOPERATION  Programme V. Innovation, research and systematic observation 
Activity  5.2.  Encourage  cooperation  in  Activity 16 and 17. Research and systematic observation 
international initiatives and cross-border projects 
related to biodiversity 
 
Axes of action that are incompatible with the Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change 
are not detected in any of these cases. 
The National Landscape Strategy and the Circular Economy Plan are currently being reviewed 
and drafted; since previous versions of these strategies and action plans have already been 
finalised, it is considered more appropriate to assess the appropriateness and the relationship 
with these strategies when they have been reviewed and approved. 
In this regard, within the framework of the National Energy and Climate Change Committee, the 
suitability, compatibility and relationship of the Strategy with the new plans, programmes and 
strategies that are approved in the future can be considered.   
 
 
39  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
ANNEX 1 
Impacts and vulnerability in the face of climate change in Andorra  
Prioritisation 
Sector  of the  Impacts of climate change28  Associated vulnerabilities2 
PAACC27 
-Crop vulnerability 
1  Changes in plant productivity (crops and pastures or mowed meadows) and  -Pasture vulnerability 
   animal productivity and the demand for hydric resources within the sector  -Vulnerability of the livestock to changes in the composition and quality of 
the pastures 
-Vulnerability of the livestock to changes in the composition and quality of 
  
Changes in the composition and quality of the pastures  the pastures 
Changes in the phenology of the plant species that could generate 
  
misalignments with the pollinating insect cycles  -Vulnerability of the crops to the difficulties facing insect pollination 
   Rise in the altitudinal limit of the forest to the detriment of the pastures    
   Extension of the pasturage period due to the rising temperatures    
AGRICULTURE     Viability of new crops due to the rising temperatures    
AND  -Vulnerability of the crops to the presence of diseases and pests 
LIVESTOCK  2  -Vulnerability of the livestock’s health to the presence of diseases and 
FARMING  New pests and diseases due to the new climatic conditions  pests 
-Vulnerability of the soil to extreme climatic phenomena such as heavy 
rainfall and storms, floods and landslides that will generate more soil 
erosion 
Damage and difficulties in the management of the agricultural and livestock  -Vulnerability of the livestock’s health to heatwaves 
  
farming land, infrastructures, meadows and pastures due to the increase in  -Vulnerability of the economy of the farmers and livestock breeders to 
  
the number of extreme climatic phenomena and the year-on-year variability  declining production due to droughts 
3 
of the climatic conditions (storms, gales, floods, landslides, etc.)  -Vulnerability of the crops to the difficulties faced by insect pollination 
-Vulnerability of the soil to extreme climatic phenomena such as heavy 
rainfall and storms, floods and landslides that will generate more soil 
erosion 
           
-Vulnerability of the habitats of ombrophilous species and others with poor 
   The disappearance, displacement or modification of the distribution and 
tolerance of droughts (such as the fir tree) to the reduced availability of 
BIODIVERSITY     functioning of habitats, with a consequent change in the distribution of animal 
water and the rising temperatures 
   and plant species and the risk of their extinction 
-Vulnerability of species associated with habitats linked to the forest’s 
                                                           
27 Source: Participatory process for the adaptation of Andorra to climate change (2014) 
28 Source: Participatory process for the adaptation of Andorra to climate change (2014) and the study titled Climate change in the Pyrenees: impacts, vulnerabilities and 
adaptation (2018), conducted by the Pyrenean Climate Change Observatory (OPCC)    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Prioritisation 
Sector  of the  Impacts of climate change28  Associated vulnerabilities2 
PAACC27 
altitudinal limit to the rise in this limit. Changes in the distribution of habitats 
that favour some species of fauna due to the rise in the forest’s altitude 
-Vulnerability of the springs, a habitat directly related to the presence of 
water, to droughts. Vulnerability of the species linked to this habitat 
2  -Vulnerability of the habitats related to the presence of snow. Vulnerability 
of animal and plant species linked to these habitats, such as the white 
partridge and flora species in snowdrifts 
-Vulnerability of species linked to host plants due to the variability of the 
distribution of these habitats 
Changes in the phenology of the species that could generate misalignments  -Vulnerability of plants to the phenological changes that may generate 
1 
with the pollinating insect cycles  misalignments with the pollinators’ cycles 
Rise in the rate of soil erosion due to the increase in heavy rainfall that leads 
  
to losses of the habitats of several species    
-Vulnerability of the native flora to the colonisation of exotic invasive 
species 
3  Entry of new vectors and new allochthonous species that may lead to new  -Vulnerability of the forests due to the increased risk of fires, the possibility 
   pests and diseases or the displacement of native species  of periods of drought and the presence of pests 
-Vulnerability of the wildlife’s health due to the potential presence of 
diseases and pests 
           
   Changes in the phenology and distribution of the species    
Changes in the distribution of the forest plant species and an increase in the 
   forest’s altitudinal limit due to the rising temperatures and the reduce 
pressure of the livestock    
   An increase in biomass production (due to the rise in CO)    
2
An increased likelihood of droughts (greater hydric stress) and less  -Vulnerability of the forests to drought 
atmospheric humidity, which will increase the risk of forest fires and affect  -Vulnerability of ombrophilous species and others with poor tolerance of 
FOREST  vegetation, reduce the growth of vegetation, cause its defoliation and  droughts (such as the fir tree) to the reduced availability of water and the 
1 and 2 
MANAGEMENT  discolouration, weaken the forests and increase their vulnerability to  rising temperatures 
  
diseases and pests and other natural damage that may even lead to their  -Vulnerability of the forests to potential attacks by pests and diseases The 
death from drought  forest will be more vulnerable if it is weakened by drought conditions 
  -Vulnerability of the forests to the risk of fire 
-Vulnerability of the forests due to changes in soil quality and increased 
erosion 
3  Damage to the forests caused by extreme phenomena such as heavy  -Vulnerability to severe weather events, such as high winds and torrential 
storms, heavy rainfall and winds may lead to falling and uprooted trees,  rain causing physical damage to the forest, resulting in falling trees, 
greater soil erosion and landslides  landslides, etc. 
            
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
Prioritisation 
Sector  of the  Impacts of climate change28  Associated vulnerabilities2 
PAACC27 
-Vulnerability of the hydric resources to the decrease in rainfall and the 
rising temperatures. The quality and quantity of the available surface 
waters and groundwater may be affected 
Fewer hydric resources (due to increased ETP), which may lead to drinking  -Vulnerability of the public economy in its response to the increase in costs 
1 and 4  water supply problems. A decrease of 14.9% is expected in the 2021-2050  associated with the treatment of water, given the potential decrease in its 
  Horizon (240 Hm3/year) and 37.6% is forecast in the 2071-2100 Horizon  quality and quantity 
(176 Hm3/year) in relation to the 1961-1990 period (282 Hm3/year)  -Vulnerability of the consumer economy in terms of it assuming the 
potential increase in the cost of supplying drinking water to homes in the 
event that the supply companies increase the charges associated with the 
treatment of water to ensure its quality 
A reduction in the volume of water stored in the form of snow, the duration of 
this storage (snow season) and the modification of the hydrological regimes, 
  
a reduction in the snow-related nature of the rivers, a potential increase in 
3 
the winter flows, a fall in the thawing points and the advancement of the start 
of the thawing period    
WATER  The increased risk of flooding due to the greater potential for torrential rain 
MANAGEMENT     and severe storms    
  
2, 7 and 8  The increased competition between the different uses of water The need for 
prioritisation based on requirements and the emergence of conflicts over  -Vulnerability of the hydroelectric sector to variations in availability linked to 
water use: drinking water, irrigation, energy use, recreational use, etc.  surface hydric resources  
   -Vulnerability of the public economy in its response to the increase in costs 
associated with the treatment of water, given the potential decrease in its 
quality and quantity 
Changes in the monthly regime of the rivers and a decrease in the volume, 
-Vulnerability of the consumer economy in terms of it assuming the 
with a consequent reduction in the quality of the water, an increase in the 
potential increase in the cost of supplying drinking water to homes in the 
5 and 6  concentration of pollutants, a loss of quality in the aquatic ecosystems and  event that the supply companies increase the charges associated with the 
an increase in the costs of treating the water to make it drinkable 
treatment of water to ensure its quality 
-Vulnerability of the ecological state of the aquatic systems due to the 
decrease in the quantity and quality of the water 
           
-Vulnerability of the health and well-being of the population to extreme 
HEALTH  4  climatic phenomena such as heatwaves, natural risks associated with 
climate change, etc.  
-Vulnerability of the most sensitive groups (children and the elderly) and 
An increase in the frequency of heatwaves, leading to negative impacts on  people with a fragile state of health to the health-related impacts of climate 
health, especially that of children and the elderly  change 
45  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Prioritisation 
Sector  of the  Impacts of climate change28  Associated vulnerabilities2 
PAACC27 
1, 2 and 3  -Vulnerability of the health and well-being of the population to extreme 
climatic phenomena such as heatwaves, natural risks associated with 
climate change, etc. 
The rising temperatures and humidity conditions may lead to negative health 
 
problems: a greater presence of gases and polluting particles in the 
-Vulnerability of the health and well-being of the population due to the 
atmosphere, an increase in new disease vectors, drinking water supply 
appearance of new vectors transmitting diseases due to the rising 
problems with repercussions for health and changes in the phenology of 
temperatures 
plants that may lead to an increase in the risk of allergies 
-Vulnerability of the health and well-being of the population due to the rise 
  
and diversification of allergies and the increase in cases of asthma and 
rhinitis 
The increase in temperature in winter could have a positive impact on the 
   health of the population, with a decrease in diseases typical of this season of 
the year (colds, flu, etc.)    
           
-Vulnerability of the infrastructures, chiefly buildings, public services and 
roads, to the greater frequency and intensity of avalanches, fires, floods, 
snowfalls, hail, strong winds, collapses, fallen trees, etc. 
A greater likelihood of extreme weather events, storms, exceptional flooding, 
-Vulnerability of the human and animal populations to the greater 
NATURAL  torrential rain, major movements due to heavy rain, drag currents, falling 
1, 2, 3 and 4  frequency and intensity of fires, snowfalls, cold and heat waves, frosts, 
RISKS  blocks and avalanches that may have an impact on the country’s socio-
lightning, landslides, drag currents, etc. 
economic sector, infrastructures and natural habitats 
-Vulnerability of the aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems to the greater 
frequency and intensity of fires, floods, droughts, strong winds, landslides, 
fallen trees, etc. 
           
Vulnerability of the electrical networks (for energy and communications) to 
temperature variations and extreme temperatures 
Effects on specific infrastructures, service networks (telecommunications, 
-Vulnerability of accessibility to the country due to the impact of extreme 
INFRASTRUCTU 1 and 3  energy, etc. ) and the road network and a reduction in citizen mobility in 
climatic phenomena 
RES AND  Andorra and abroad 
-Vulnerability of the economy, which is highly dependent on the existing 
MOBILITY 
network of infrastructures and the transport of goods 
Improvement in the internal and external movement and transport of fluids 
2 
through pipes in winter (given the fewer days with ice and cold spells)     
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
Prioritisation 
Sector  of the  Impacts of climate change28  Associated vulnerabilities2 
PAACC27 
           
-Vulnerability of old buildings with weakened structures or buildings with 
  
construction shortcomings due to exposure to extreme climatic events and 
 
their consequences 
-Vulnerability of the people exposed to damage caused to buildings and 
Damage to or weakening of the structures of buildings and public and private 
infrastructure by the effects of extreme climatic events 
infrastructures due to the greater frequency of extreme climatic events 
-Vulnerability of the infrastructures to extreme climatic events and the risk 
(floods, heavy rain, etc.) and increased construction and building costs for 
of flooding, landslides and other natural risks influenced by the effects of 
1, 4 and 5  protection against these phenomena 
climate change 
-Vulnerability of developed and developable areas close to watercourses 
URBAN  (development guarantee) to the risk of major flooding 
PLANNING  - Vulnerability of developed areas downstream from canalised areas 
   Changes in the energy demand of buildings Increased energy consumption 
in summer due to the air conditioning of buildings as a result of the greater 
2  frequency of urban heat islands    
-Vulnerability of parks and gardens and other public urban services to the 
Increased competition for water resources from different environmental, 
   water deficit 
social and economic sectors: irrigation of grassed areas, human 
3  -Vulnerability of the population to drinking water supply problems due to a 
consumption, etc. 
decrease in the availability of hydric resources and their quality 
           
3  It will be necessary to refurbish buildings and homes to adapt them to the  -Vulnerability of the domestic economy to potential increases as a result of 
new thermal gradients and comply with the degree of climate comfort.  fluctuations and increases in energy prices (fossil fuels, production 
Consideration of energy poverty  systems, etc.) 
-Vulnerability of the electricity transmission and distribution systems to a 
loss of efficiency when the environmental operating conditions such as the 
Increased risks in relation to the linear distribution networks and specific 
   temperature are higher 
ENERGY  electrical infrastructures  
-Vulnerability of the energy installations to damage caused by storms, fires, 
droughts, falling trees, etc. 
     
Increased energy demand in the summer, which may exceed the supply 
   capacity provided by the existing infrastructures  -Vulnerability of the electricity supply capacity to a peak in energy demand 
due to the saturation of the supply network 
   The rising temperatures will reduce energy needs in winter    
47  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Prioritisation 
Sector  of the  Impacts of climate change28  Associated vulnerabilities2 
PAACC27 
A potential increase in the price of hydrocarbons, not only due to the rise in 
demand and the progressive depletion of the natural resources that provide 
   this energy source, but also compliance with any potential regulations (e.g. in  -Vulnerability of the domestic economy to potential increases as a result of 
accordance with the decisions resulting from the United Nations Framework  fluctuations and increases in energy prices (fossil fuels, production 
Convention on Climate Change)  systems, etc.) 
1 
Modification of the operating guidelines for the hydrological system of  -Vulnerability of the hydroelectric power plants due to the variability of river 
Andorra’s hydroelectric power plant and the potential impact on production  flows and water availability Potential associated technical problems   
due to less water availability as a global resource and the modification of the  -Vulnerability of the electricity supply capacity to a peak in energy demand 
annual hydrological regime  due to the saturation of the supply network 
Wind energy production could be negatively affected in the coming decades 
  
due to climate change     
New strategic opportunities stemming from preparation for the effects of 
2  climate change to increase national production and reduce current energy 
dependence, including the use of national renewable resources    
           
2 and 3  The increase in economic costs, energy availability and the cost of water due  -Vulnerability of the industrial sector to variations in the prices of energy, 
to changes in the climatic conditions could affect the performance and  raw materials (provided by means of transport) and water, preventing it 
competitiveness of industry.  from continuing its activity under the same conditions as those to date 
-Vulnerability of the industrial sector to the foreseeable increase in natural 
The increase in adverse weather phenomena such as heavy storms, gales,  risks 
1 
hail, etc. may affect the infrastructures of the industrial areas and their  -Vulnerability of public and private industrial infrastructures and 
INDUSTRY  buildings  communication in the event of adverse climatic events 
Consideration of stricter regulations arising from compliance with 
4  international agreements designed to prevent the exceeding of the threshold 
   level for greenhouse gases emissions and particles emitted into the  -Vulnerability of the industrial sector to variations in the prices of energy, 
atmosphere, potentially affecting the industrial activities that emit pollutants  raw materials (provided by means of transport) and water, preventing it 
into the atmosphere.  from continuing its activity under the same conditions as those to date 
Opportunity for the country’s future industrial fabric still to be developed, with 
   the capacity to include climate change in its strategic approach from the 
outset    
            
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
Prioritisation 
Sector  of the  Impacts of climate change28  Associated vulnerabilities2 
PAACC27 
-Vulnerability of the ski resorts due to the decrease in natural snow, 
3 and 5 
depending on the altitude 
-Vulnerability of the ski resorts due to the fact that the production of 
artificial snow requires water and energy and a certain temperature, 
leading to rising temperatures and less water availability 
-Vulnerability of snow sports, which are heavily dependent on the weather 
The changes in rainfall distribution and the rising natural snow level will 
and climatic conditions 
affect the quality, thickness and covering of the snow at ski resorts 
-Vulnerability of the country’s economy, which is closely linked to tourism 
  
and, therefore, snow tourism The tourism sector has a very significant 
influence on the domestic GDP in the current economic model 
-Vulnerability of the ski resorts due to the fact that the production of 
artificial snow requires water and energy and a certain temperature, 
leading to rising temperatures and less water availability 
-Vulnerability of snow sports, which are heavily dependent on the weather 
and climatic conditions 
-Vulnerability of the country’s economy, which is closely linked to tourism 
   Difficulty in the planning of investments and the scaling of infrastructures 
and, therefore, snow tourism The tourism sector has a very significant 
TOURISM     designed for tourism activities, as well as increased associated costs such 
influence on the domestic GDP in the current economic model 
2  as the production of artificial snow 
-Vulnerability of the ski resorts due to the fact that the production of 
artificial snow requires water and energy and a certain temperature, 
leading to rising temperatures and less water availability 
  
-Vulnerability of the ski resorts due to the fact that the production of 
Less availability of water for tourism-related uses: snow production, catering, 
artificial snow requires water and energy and a certain temperature, 
   shopping malls, etc. 
leading to rising temperatures and less water availability 
Rising temperatures in both summer and winter Improved climate comfort for 
summer tourism, measured by the climate comfort index (ICT), which will 
  
rise from the current acceptable values (1961-1990) to good and very good 
values     
Changes in the natural ecosystems and landscape that may have an  -Vulnerability of mountain tourism in terms of the enjoyment of nature and 
   irreversible effect on some iconographic elements of the Pyrenean  the landscapes in relation to the impact of climate change on biodiversity 
landscape  and the ecosystems 
49  
/ 53
 
    
The Long-Term Strategy on Energy and Climate Change (2020-2050) 
 
 
Prioritisation 
Sector  of the  Impacts of climate change28  Associated vulnerabilities2 
PAACC27 
The increased pressure from summer tourism may have an impact on the 
  
landscape and the natural environment    
4  An increase in Andorra’s competitiveness in the Pyrenees in winter and 
  
1  summer 
           
Decrease in the influx of tourism linked to winter sports and, therefore, all the 
1  economic activity related to shops, bars, restaurants and accommodation  -Vulnerability of the sector due to its dependence on tourism and winter 
services associated with snow tourism  sports 
The greater likelihood of severe and extreme weather events that could 
-Vulnerability of the trade and service infrastructures to extreme climatic 
result in heavy flooding, landslides, etc., cause damage to goods, 
events 
3 and 4  infrastructures, shops and service and financial buildings and lead to an 
TRADE AND  increase in the maintenance costs and investment to adapt the  -Vulnerability of the logistics of the shops and services due to their direct 
SERVICES  infrastructures to these extreme events  dependence on the networks (roads, electricity, telecommunications, etc.) 
   Uncertainties in the insurance sector    
New opportunities for the market and the diversification of range of 
commercial products, generated by the deseasonalisation of tourism 
2 
envisaged as a response to the threats to snow tourism posed by climate 
change.    
 
 
  
The National Energy Strategy for the Fight against Climate Change 
 
 
ANNEX 2 
Regulatory framework and relationship with the Strategy’s programmes 
51  
/ 53
 
  
Acknowledgement of the 
The Long-Term  Challenges when addressing  Andorra’s energy  climate crisis and the 
Paris Agreement/United Nations 
Strategy on Energy  climate change in the  Law 21/2018 (Litecc)  infrastructure  declaration of the state of 
Framework Convention on Climate Change 
and Climate Change  Pyrenees29  sectoral plan (2018)  climate and ecological 
emergency (2020) 
Decarbonisation to achieve  Long-term temperature objective (article 2):  Adapt to the imbalances between energy  33% of the country’s electricity demand by  33% of demand for electricity  80% of national electricity production must 
carbon neutrality: national action  restrict the increase in global temperature to below 2ºC and  supply and demand  2030 with domestic production  per year by Horizon 2030 and  come from renewable energies, promoting 
programmes to mitigate  then restrict the increase even further to 1.5ºC      at least 50% per year by  hydraulic, solar, wind, geothermal and 
greenhouse gas emissions    67% of this source of renewable energy  Horizon 2050  biomass energies 
  High point and climate neutrality/mitigation (article 4):  resources in the energy mix    One third of electricity production must be 
  reach the GHG emission high point as soon as possible     >75% of this source of  nationally produced by 2030 
Communicate and maintain the nationally determined  Procure the infrastructures necessary for  renewable energy resources  It’s necessary to use renewable energies in all 
contributions (NDCs) and implement national measures to  the transport of the energy and increase the  in the energy mix  the Administration’s buildings and to reduce 
achieve them  capacity to import electrical power in    the consumption of electricity and heating in 
  accordance with the guidelines of the 2016- Reduce GHG emissions by  public establishments 
Deposits and sinks (article 5):  2026 FEDA master plan for electrical  37% per year in relation to the  The energy efficiency of public lighting has to 
encourage the conservation and improvement of the GHG  infrastructures  BAU scenario by Horizon  be improved by means of the passing of a 
sinks, including the forests    2030  regulation within a year 
Reduce GHG emissions by 32% in the case  It will be necessary to incorporate an energy 
of electrical energy (84g  manager by the end of 2020 and to conduct 
CO2equivalent/kWh) and by 7% in the case  energy audits in all the Administration’s 
of thermal energy (248g CO2  heated buildings by 2022 
equivalent/kWh)  Housing refurbishment needs more promotion 
to make it more efficient 
Programme for national action  Adaptation (article 7): increase the capacity for adaptation and  Increase safety in view of the natural risks      It’s necessary to incorporate the measures of 
for adaptation to climate change  resilience and reduce the vulnerability to climate change. We  Support the actors from the territory in the  the PAACC (Participatory Process for the 
and greater resilience  should highlight the parties’ commitment to the formulation of  event of water scarcity and droughts  Adaptation of Andorra to Climate Change) into 
  national adaptation plans  Guarantee the quality of the surface waters  the National Energy Strategy for the Fight 
  and groundwater  against Climate Change, re-edit the 
Losses and damages (article 8):    participatory process if necessary and 
increase the capacity for adaptation and resilience and reduce  Address the changes in crop productivity  incorporate new measures to adapt the 
the vulnerability to climate change. We should highlight the  and quality and capitalise on the emerging  Strategy to any changes and needs that arise 
parties’ commitment to the formulation of national adaptation  opportunities   
plans  Adapt to the imbalances between energy 
supply and demand 
The national carbon credit  Voluntary participation/related and non-related approaches to         
market and other taxation tools  the market30 (article 6): 
for achieving carbon neutrality  Establish a mechanism to contribute to mitigating GHG 
  emissions and supporting sustainable development and define 
a framework for non-mercantile approaches to sustainable 
development 
Social transition programme    Prepare the population to cope with      Consumers need to be informed by means of 
  extreme weather  the energy labels for vehicles, household 
Maintain the tourist appeal of the Pyrenees  appliances and buildings by 2023. 
Address the increased spread of diseases,  Workshops must be incorporated into the 
pests and invasive species  Andorran School to study the ecological 
footprint, raise awareness of climate change 
and encourage better use of natural resources 
Innovation, research and  Transparency (article 14):  Anticipate irreversible changes in the      An environmental audit of the economic, 
systematic observation  a solid transparency and accounting system to provide clarity  landscape  tourist, commercial and industrial sectors must 
programme  with regard to the measures and the support of the parties,  Consider the potential loss of biodiversity  be conducted within three years (24 January 
  with flexibility for different capabilities  and changes in the ecosystems  2023). The agreement specifically stipulates 
  that these audits will incorporate the GHGs 
  generated and the consumption requirements 
(e.g. energy) 
                                                           
29 Climate change in the Pyrenees: impacts, vulnerabilities and adaptation (2018), conducted by the Pyrenean Climate Change Observatory 2. 
30 In accordance with the San Jose Principles on high Ambition and Integrity in the international carbon markets established in article 6 of the Paris Agreement.  
 