COP
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY  
LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS  
22
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYCat. No.: 978-0-660-06577-9
ISBN: En4-291/2016E-PDF
Unless otherwise specified, you may not reproduce materials in this publication, in whole or in part, for 
the purposes of commercial redistribution without prior written permission from Environment and Climate 
Change Canada’s copyright administrator. To obtain permission to reproduce Government of Canada 
materials for commercial purposes, apply for Crown Copyright Clearance by contacting:
Environment and Climate Change Canada
Public Inquiries Centre
7th Floor, Fontaine Building
200 Sacré-Coeur Boulevard
Gatineau QC  K1A 0H3
Telephone: 819-997-2800
Toll Free: 1-800-668-6767 (in Canada only)
Email: ec.enviroinfo.ec@canada.ca 
Photos: © Environment and Climate Change Canada and © Thinkstockphotos.ca
©   Her Majesty the Queen in Right of Canada, represented by the Minister of Environment  
and Climate Change, 2016
Aussi disponible en françaisContents
Foreword                                                                                            1
Executive Summary                                                                                                       3
1 Context                                                                                            8
2 Existing Analyses on Decarbonisation                                                    13
3 Decarbonisation and Expansion of Canada’s Electricity System                        28
4 Energy Consumption in End Use Applications                                                        33
5 Non-Carbon Dioxide Emissions                                                             51
6 Forests                                                                                                                        57
7 Agriculture                                                                                        62
8 Waste                                                                                               66
9 Clean Technology Sector                                                                                       70
10 Achieving a Low-Carbon Future through Infrastructure Investments             74
Conclusion                                                                                          75
Reference List                                                                                      76
Annex 1: Detailed Modelling Results from 2050 Scenarios                                     83
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY iiiForeword
Canada views this initial Mid-Century Strategy report as an opportunity to begin the 
conversation about what a long-term low-greenhouse gas emission society would entail. 
The report provides a basic framework regarding what challenges and opportunities 
have currently been identified in academic literature and expert based analyses 
regarding deep emissions reductions in the mid to long-term. 
Canada submits this strategy to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) under the premise that the content of the report will continue to be 
updated and adjusted as Canada advances on the implementation of its low-carbon 
development pathway. As such, Canada’s position is that the Mid-Century Strategies 
should be submitted in an iterative or cyclical process, where Parties provide regular 
updates as low-GHG technologies and national circumstances continue to evolve.  
This iterative process will allow the Canadian public, experts, and stakeholder 
communities, to provide substance to this framework as Canada moves towards a 
common global objective of reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 12 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYExecutive Summary
Building on analyses from the Intergovernmental Panel 
Canada is committed to creating a cleaner, more  on Climate Change (IPCC) Fifth Assessment Report, 
innovative economy that reduces emissions and  the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) 
protects the environment, while creating well-paying  states that GHG emission reductions in the order of  
jobs and promoting robust economic growth. 70 to 95% below 2010 levels would be required by 
2050 to remain on a pathway consistent with a >50% 
A low-greenhouse gas future represents an 
likelihood of limiting average global temperature 
opportunity to increase prosperity and the well-being 
rise to 1.5°C. Achieving this temperature goal is only 
of Canadians, to improve the livability of the built 
possible through actions on carbon dioxide and 
environment, modernise transportation, and enhance 
short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs) together. For 
the natural environment. 
the purpose of the Mid-Century Strategy, Canada 
examines an emissions abatement pathway consistent 
Canada’s actions on climate change will help 
with net emissions falling by 80% from 2005 levels.
communities in Canada in tangible and meaningful 
ways, since clean growth is not just good for the 
Reducing greenhouse gas emissions to levels 
planet — it’s also good for the economy. The benefits 
consistent with the reasonable probability of 
include: reducing air pollution and congestion, 
maintaining this temperature goal will not be easy. 
modernising infrastructure to provide more inclusive 
It will require substantial effort on the part of all 
and sustainable cities, creating cleaner and more 
Canadians, with a fundamental restructuring of 
modern communities, growing Canada’s clean 
multiple sectors of the economy. Cost-effective 
technology sector, increasing economic productivity 
abatement opportunities will need to be realised 
and efficiency, saving energy and reducing energy 
from virtually every greenhouse gas emissions source 
costs, and enhancing resilience to the impacts of 
and activity. In the energy sector, this will include 
climate change.
enhanced energy efficiency and conservation, finding 
cleaner ways to produce and store electricity, and 
Addressing climate change paves the way towards 
switching towards non-emitting electricity or other 
innovation and jobs in the clean energy and 
low-GHG alternatives. 
technology sectors. This represents an opportunity to 
adopt innovations that can enhance quality of life. 
Although this will require thoughtful and significant 
Canada is investing in a cleaner future for our children 
effort on the part of all Canadians  (including robust 
and grandchildren, and creating the right conditions 
government policy such as carbon pricing, regulatory 
for communities everywhere to create good jobs in a 
measures, and support for technology development), 
modern, clean global economy.
the cost of inaction poses a dire risk that cannot be 
ignored. This risk is threefold:
For the purpose of the Mid-Century Strategy, Canada 
examines an emissions abatement pathway consistent 
•  Ongoing emissions of anthropogenic GHGs will 
with net emissions falling by 80% in 2050 from 2005 
cause atmospheric concentrations to continue 
levels. This is consistent with the Paris Agreement’s  
to rise, leading to higher global average 
2°C to 1.5°C temperature goal.
temperatures and a cascade of related impacts, 
including increases in severe weather, and rising 
The Paris Agreement, adopted at the 21st Conference 
sea level.
of the Parties (COP21) to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), represents 
•  Failure to act now means that costs will likely 
the first time in history that virtually all of the world’s 
rise in the future as the required pace of 
nations agreed to pursue their highest possible 
decarbonisation increases. This raises the 
ambition to combat climate change under a  
probability of misallocation of investment and 
common framework. Through the Paris Agreement 
infrastructure, as well as stranded assets.
over 195 countries representing 97% of global GHG 
emissions agreed to strengthen the global response  •  As the world moves to address climate change, 
to the threat of climate change, including by holding  Canada should not be left behind in the emerging 
the increase in the global average temperature to well  global markets for clean energy and related 
below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing  goods and services.  
efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above 
pre-industrial levels.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 3A global clean growth economy offers considerable  While today’s technologies and knowledge can 
economic opportunities and co-benefits such as  significantly reduce emissions, the transition to a  
growing Canada’s clean technology sector, using  low-carbon economy can be eased through 
more efficient technology globally, mitigating other  innovation, a scale up of RD&D investment, and 
types of pollutants, improving health and air quality,  private sector investment   
and increasing productivity through more efficient 
Most international and Canadian greenhouse 
life cycle production   
gas mid-century abatement analyses note that 
Responding to climate change presents an  deep cuts in emissions are possible with today’s 
opportunity for Canada to discover and adopt new  technology, although mitigation costs remain high 
and innovative ways to enhance our quality of life,  in certain areas. For example, an assessment from 
while ensuring that this prosperity is sustainable given  the Council of Canadian Academies published in 
finite natural resources and environmental concerns.  2015, suggests that Canada can significantly reduce 
For example, designing low-carbon buildings can  GHG emissions by using commercially available 
save on energy requirements and heating, cooling,  technologies in key sectors of the economy. Studies 
and electricity costs, while increasing natural light  consistently point to currently deployed technologies 
and airflow. As another example, reducing traffic  as being essential components to the climate 
congestion through more sustainable movement  change solution, such as expanding the use of non-
of people and goods would reduce GHG emissions  emitting electricity across end-use sectors, increasing 
as well as air and noise pollution, save travel time,  the use of alternative fuels, and improving energy 
and lead to healthier and more productive cities.  conservation and efficiency. 
Often through analysing supply chains, or life-cycle 
Many studies also note that new and emerging 
assessments of final products, solutions can be 
technologies can help to smooth our transition to a 
found that are environmentally, socially, as well as 
low GHG economy. For example, the International 
economically preferable.
Energy Agency (IEA) demonstrates that a sustainable 
Finding low-GHG solutions will also provide Canada  energy transition is possible with currently deployed 
with opportunities to help other countries that  or near-commercial technologies, but that the 
are also pursuing low-GHG objectives. Canada’s  long-term transition will be eased (in terms of 
clean technology sector has grown substantially  investment requirements and timing) with the near-
over the last few years, and there continues to be  term acceleration of deployment of clean energy 
considerable prospects for continued growth in the  options, or the development of more innovative 
sector. Further investments in research, development  technologies. The IEA highlights that current global 
and deployment (RD&D) of clean technology, will  RD&D investments are well below what is required to 
support Canada’s competitiveness in the short and  achieve our international climate goals.  
long term, both in emerging and traditional market, 
Likewise, substantial financial investments are needed 
creating higher paying jobs, and stimulating exports. 
from the private sector to move towards a low-GHG 
Through “Mission Innovation”, Canada along with  future, and related risks and opportunities associated 
20 governments and the European Union, have  with these investments should be identified early. 
agreed to double their respective investments  Carbon pricing can provide the market signal 
in transformative, clean energy research and  required for private sector investment and innovation. 
development over five years, encourage private  Technology developers and users are best positioned 
sector investment in clean energy technology,  to bring forward new technologies that will ultimately 
and increase collaboration among participating  succeed. Innovation in clean technologies, whether 
countries. Canada is making key investments in  it is a breakthrough technology or one that improves 
clean energy and emissions-reducing technology  the efficiency of an existing process, can lead to 
to accelerate domestic adoption and to deploy our  significant GHG abatement internationally as the 
energy know-how and technology to markets around  new technology becomes utilised globally.  
the world. Adopting innovative technologies in the 
natural resources sectors (energy, mining, forestry, 
agriculture, and fisheries) will promote Canada’s 
international leadership in sustainable resource 
development, providing prosperity to Canadians.
4 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYCanada’s mid-century and long-term objectives   sector, and help Canadians manage the effects of 
will be ultimately realized though short-term  climate change, by building capacity for adaptation 
concrete action  and strengthening resilience.
Canada’s Mid-Century Strategy is not a blueprint for  On March 3, 2016, Canada’s First Ministers and 
action, and it is not policy prescriptive. Rather, the  Indigenous Leaders met in Vancouver and 
report is meant to inform the conversation about how  committed to developing a concrete plan to achieve 
Canada can achieve a low-carbon economy. This  Canada’s international greenhouse gas reduction 
includes describing modelling analyses that illustrate  commitments through a pan-Canadian framework 
various scenarios towards deep emissions reductions.   for clean growth and climate change.  Canada’s 
Canada’s Mid-Century Strategy outlines potential  First Ministers released the Vancouver Declaration 
GHG abatement opportunities, emerging key  in which they agreed to build on commitments 
technologies, and identifies areas where emissions  and actions already taken by provinces and 
reductions will be more challenging and require  territories in order to meet or exceed Canada’s 
policy focus in the context of a low carbon economy  GHG emissions targets. They highlighted the need 
by 2050.  to foster investment to promote clean economic 
growth and create jobs that support the transition to 
To deliver on Canada’s short term action, the  a low-carbon economy, while benefitting individual 
Government of Canada is working closely with  Canadians and addressing competitiveness 
provinces and territories, and with National  impacts on businesses.  They committed to deliver 
Indigenous Organizations to finalize a pan-Canadian  mitigation actions by adopting a broad range 
framework for clean growth and climate change,  of domestic measures, including carbon pricing 
which will include actions to reduce emissions, build  mechanisms, adapted to each jurisdiction’s specific 
resilience, and spur innovation and create jobs.   circumstances. Commitments were also made to 
develop and implement strong, complementary 
This will develop Canada’s plan for meeting the 2030 
adaptation policies and action on climate resilience 
target of reducing GHG emissions to 30% below 2005 
to address climate risks facing our populations, 
levels, and also includes a carbon pricing framework. 
infrastructure, economies and ecosystems, and 
The pan-Canadian framework will pave the way 
Canada’s northern regions in particular.
towards innovation and jobs in the clean energy 
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 5The Mid-Century Strategy will help inform the pan-  In order to increase the likelihood of limiting global 
Canadian framework, while long term planning is  temperature rise to well below 2°C, net “negative” 
essential to infrastructure and energy investments,  carbon dioxide emissions (i.e., more emissions 
setting the course for a low-carbon future    sequestered through anthropogenic means than 
are released to the atmosphere) will be required this 
The development of a Mid-Century Strategy is an  century. Negative carbon dioxide emissions may be 
essential step to set the course towards a low-carbon  achieved with large-scale afforestation, or bioenergy 
economy as it will inform longer term planning and  with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), the latter 
investment. Long-term planning is fundamental for  being a key feature in the great majority of 1.5°C and 
creating and managing robust energy systems, and  2.0°C scenarios in the current literature.
careful and far-sighted policy making is essential 
to combat climate change in an economically  Carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies 
efficient, socially acceptable, and effective manner.  offer one avenue for preventing emissions to the 
Because of the long-lived nature of some energy  atmosphere. For example, the oil and gas sector 
supply and demand equipment, investments and  can take advantage of its proximity to geological 
policy decisions made today will affect the level  reservoirs to store carbon emissions captured on site. 
of greenhouse gases in 2050. For example, many  The iron and steel, pulp and paper, chemical, and 
of the buildings and electricity generating facilities  cement sectors also have potential for emissions 
built today will continue to be operational in 2050.  reduction through CCS. Negative carbon dioxide 
Once these assets are locked-in, replacing them with  emissions can be achieved when carbon capture 
cleaner alternatives will impose additional costs and  and storage technologies are combined with the 
complexity. Likewise, government policies should be  use of energy from biomass (BECCS). In this case, 
designed with both a shorter term as well as longer- the carbon that is removed from the atmosphere, 
term focus, ensuring that greenhouse gas emissions  and sequestered through vegetation growth, is 
will continue to decline towards a low-GHG future.   captured and stored when the plant material is used 
to generate energy. If BECCS were to be deployed at 
By aligning its goals to the UNFCCC temperature  sufficient scale, there is the potential to achieve net 
goals, Canada now has an opportunity to integrate  negative global carbon dioxide emissions, although 
climate change objectives into its long term  the feasibility of large scale deployment of negative 
planning processes. Although this report does not  emissions technologies is still unknown.
propose specific policies, it identifies key options 
for Canada’s low-GHG development. For example,  A number of other options are also being 
the anticipation of significant growth in Canadian  investigated globally that have the potential to 
electricity demand should underpin mid-century  remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and 
investment and planning. Planners should keep in  contribute to the achievement of global net negative 
mind that this increased demand will stem from  emissions (e.g. conversion of carbon dioxide into 
both Canadian applications as they switch away  algal biomass). These options are at various stages of 
from more carbon intensive energy sources, as  research, development and deployment. Much more 
well as potentially supplying clean electricity to  investment and innovation is needed to fully assess 
our continental neighbours. As another example,  the potential of these measures to contribute to 
planners should note that regional differences will be  achieving global temperature goals and sustainable 
a key consideration due to the variation in electricity  development objectives. 
generating portfolios, and technical capacities from 
All regions and sectors must act to reduce emissions, 
one jurisdiction to another.
but specific abatement pathways could differ from 
Carbon dioxide removal is fundamental to limiting  one jurisdiction to another  Regional cooperation will 
the increase in the global average temperature to  be key to our success 
well below 2oC  
The Strategy that we present constitutes a  
Forests play a key role in carbon sequestration. This  growing consensus over possible avenues for  
can be enhanced through forest management  low-carbon development informed by independent 
activities, increased use of long-lived harvested  expert analysis. 
wood products, and increased utilization of waste 
wood biomass.
6 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYThis Strategy identifies key objectives and building  •  Abatement of non-carbon dioxide greenhouse 
blocks that could underlie our transition to a low- gases, such as methane and hydrofluorocarbons, 
GHG economy. These building blocks frame the  is a priority given their high global warming 
foundation of Canada’s long term climate change  potentials. Reductions of these pollutants can 
mitigation strategy: often help slow the rate of near-term warming 
and contribute to achievement of the global 
•  Electrification has been identified as an essential  temperature goal. Although black carbon is 
step in all deep GHG mitigation analyses. The  not classified as a greenhouse gas, it has strong 
electrification of end use applications that are  global warming effects that must  
currently using fossil fuels is fundamental, for  also be addressed. 
example, using electricity to power certain cars, 
trucks, building appliances and heating systems,  •  Behavioural changes will also contribute to a 
and energy requirements for some industries. low-GHG economy. For example, innovative 
approaches to moving people and freight are 
•  Concurrent trends towards decarbonisation of  likely to become more widely adopted over 
the electricity generating sector are needed.   the next 35 years, as well as changes in the way 
Electricity generation in Canada is already more  people live, work, and consume. 
than 80% non-emitting, with a trend towards 
non-emitting generation expected to continue,  •  Cities are home to 70% of the world’s energy-
including through increased government action. related carbon dioxide emissions. Canadian 
cities host 80% of the national population, 
•  The significant increase in electricity demand  compared to 62% sixty years ago. With a 
resulting from electrification policies (e.g.,  continuing trend in urbanization for the 
doubling or more by 2050), and electricity  upcoming decades, cities across Canada 
exports, should be satisfied through   cannot afford to wait to increase climate change 
low-carbon sources.  mitigation and adaptation efforts.
•  Canada, and North America’s, electricity  •  Canada’s forests and lands will continue to play 
future will be shaped by interprovincial and  an important role in sequestering substantial 
intercontinental cooperation. Enhanced  amounts of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. 
interjurisdictional electricity transmission  This sequestration can be augmented through 
interties could allow areas with hydropower, or  policies and measures that better manage our 
other forms of non-emitting generation, to sell  forests and forest products. Without consideration 
electricity to other provinces or U.S. States that  of the global land sector, the 1.5 to 2°C 
rely on fossil fuels.  temperature goal will be very hard to achieve. 
•  Energy efficiency and demand side  •  Innovation will also be crucial. A sustainable 
management are key to achieving deep GHG  energy transition is possible with currently 
reductions. For example, the International Energy  deployed or near-commercial technologies, but 
Agency (IEA) estimates that 38% of the required  the long-term transition will be eased with the 
global emissions reductions associated with  near-term accelerated deployment of clean 
a 2°C pathway could be met through energy  energy options, or the development of more 
efficiency improvements. Efficiency gains are  innovative technologies. The private sector has 
also key enablers of electrification technologies  an important role to play in this respect including 
and consumer savings.  spurring investment and innovation towards low 
GHG alternatives. Carbon pricing will be an 
•  Some sectors such as heavy industries, 
important element to achieving this objective.  
marine transportation, some heavy freight 
transportation, and aviation could move to lower  •  Collaboration with provinces and territories, 
or low-carbon fuels such as second generation  Indigenous peoples, municipalities, business and 
biofuels or hydrogen. Alternatively, new and  other stakeholders will be essential to Canada’s 
emerging technologies in synthetic hydrocarbons  long-term success in enabling clean growth, 
or energy storage would be needed.  reducing emissions and seizing the opportunities 
of the low-carbon global economy. 
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 71  Context
KEY MESSAGES:
•  Most Canadians recognise the need to mitigate climate change and limit 
the increase in the global average temperature, but the magnitude of the 
challenge is less well understood, with a requirement for very deep emissions 
cuts from every sector by mid-century. 
•  Mitigating greenhouse gas emissions is necessary to avoid the  
increasing threat presented by climate change. Benefits of action to reduce 
climate risk will outweigh costs and the international community is moving 
towards low-greenhouse gas economies. A particular focus on short-lived 
climate pollutants is also required if we are to stay below the 1.5°C - 2°C  
temperature goal.
•  Canada has worked closely with the United States and Mexico in the 
development of this report. Our continental partners have also described 
ambitious mitigation action by 2050 in their respective strategies.
•  Encouraging international efforts, including reducing emissions in other 
countries will be key to the global response.
•  Working collaboratively with Indigenous peoples by supporting their on-
going implementation of climate change initiatives will be key. Consultations 
with Indigenous communities must respect the constitutional, legal, and 
international obligations that Canada has for its Indigenous peoples. 
•  The Mid-Century Strategy will help inform the pan-Canadian framework (PCF) 
for clean growth and climate change.
1 1  Most Canadians recognise the need to mitigate climate change and limit 
the increase in the global average temperature, but the magnitude of 
the challenge is less well understood, with a requirement for very deep 
emissions cuts from every sector by mid-century  
Canada played a leadership role in advancing the adoption of the Paris Agreement 
and supporting the global temperature goal of holding the increase in the global 
average temperature to well below 2°C and pursue efforts to limit the temperature 
increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. Ensuring that the global temperature 
remains well below 2°C will require global greenhouse gas emissions to peak as soon as 
possible with a rapid decline in emissions thereafter. It will also require fast concurrent 
actions on short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs) (see chapter 5).
The latest assessment report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC) relied on a range of models to examine feasible scenarios for global emissions 
trajectories consistent with limiting global warming to less than 2°C. Building from this 
analysis, a recent study from the United Nations Environment Programme (2015)1 found 
that scenarios consistent with limiting warming to 2°C, with a >66% chance, reach net zero 
global anthropogenic carbon dioxide emissions by about 2070, while those consistent with 
limiting warming to 1.5°C with a > 50% chance reach net zero carbon dioxide emissions by 
about 2050. 
1    United Nations Environment Programme, Emissions Gap Report 2015. 
8 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYNet “negative” carbon dioxide emissions (i.e., more  increases of 4°C or more above preindustrial levels, 
emissions are sequestered through anthropogenic  consistent with expected levels by 2100 under a 
means than released to the atmosphere) would  business-as-usual scenario. These risks include 
then be required later in the century to meet  substantial species extinction, large risks to global 
the temperature goal. Negative carbon dioxide  and regional food security, and compromised 
emissions may be achieved, for example, with large- normal human activities such as growing food or 
scale afforestation or bioenergy with carbon capture  working outdoors due to the combination of high 
and storage. Negative CO  emissions are required in  temperature and humidity. These risks are reduced 
2
these scenarios to offset hard-to-mitigate non-CO  substantially under scenarios which limit global 
2
emissions (e.g., methane and nitrous oxide emissions  warming to 2°C or lower.3 
associated with food production), in order to achieve 
net zero global anthropogenic GHG emissions. Several studies have shown that the cost to address 
climate change decreases if early action is taken. 
In terms of total greenhouse gas emissions, according  For example, in 2014, the White House’s Council of 
to the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report, a limited  Economic Advisers published a report stating that 
number of studies provide scenarios that are more  for the same level of temperature stabilisation, each 
likely than not to limit warming to 1.5°C by 2100; these  decade of delayed mitigation effort leads to a 
scenarios are characterized by GHG concentrations  40% increase in net mitigation costs.4 A 2012 Navius 
below 430 ppm CO -eq by 2100 and 2050 emission  Research report, which considered the implications 
2
reduction between 70% and 95% below 2010.2  of policy delay in the context of an aggressive 2050 
target, suggested that a delay in domestic GHG 
In this context, the United States noted that its  policy action from 2012 to 2020 could cost Canada 
Intended Nationally Determined Contribution target  an additional $87 billion over the 2020 to 2050 period, 
is consistent with a straight line emission reduction  which represents an increase of about 27% in the cost 
pathway from 2020 to deep, economy-wide emission  of abatement.5 
reductions of 80% or more by 2050. Other jurisdictions 
such as Japan and the EU have adopted similar  In addition, several studies suggest that the benefits 
goals.  For the purpose of the Mid-Century Strategy,  of mitigation action can often outweigh the cost 
Canada examines an emissions abatement pathway  over the long run in terms of energy and fuel savings 
consistent with net emissions falling by 80% from   though resource efficiency gains. For example, a 
2005 levels. recent New Climate Economy Report shows that 
cities globally could save $16.6 trillion over the 2015-
2050 period through investments in projects such as 
1 2  Mitigating greenhouse gas emissions is 
mass transit and energy efficient buildings.6 Although 
necessary to avoid the increasing threat 
there is inherent uncertainty around predicting 
presented by climate change. Benefits of 
far into the future, the agreement in the literature 
action to reduce climate risk will outweigh 
reinforces the point that early action on climate 
costs and the international community 
change is crucial to reducing the overall cost of 
is moving towards low-greenhouse gas 
climate change over time.
economies  A particular focus on short-
lived climate pollutants is also required 
if we are to stay below the 1 5°C - 2°C   1 3  Canada has worked closely  
temperature goal  with the United States and Mexico  
in the development of this report   
The consequences of inaction to reach the  Our continental partners have also 
temperature goals are severe, and will have an  described ambitious mitigation action  
impact on the global environment, health, and quality  by 2050 in their respective strategies 
of life. The global average temperature is projected 
to continue to increase well beyond 2°C over the 21st  As described in the Leaders’ Statement on a North 
century if no further action is taken. With some regions  American Climate, Clean Energy, and Environment 
of the world experiencing severe effects earlier than 
3  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Climate Change 
others, including in some of the most vulnerable areas. 2014; Impacts Adaptation and Vulnerability.
4  Executive Office of the President of the United States, The Cost of 
The IPCC concluded that global climate change risks  Delaying Action to Stem Climate Change.
5  Navius Research Inc., Investment and Lock-In Analysis for 
are high to very high with global mean temperature 
Canada: Low Carbon Scenarios to 2050.
6  Global Commission on the Economy and Climate, The 
2  IPCC, Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report.   Sustainable Infrastructure Imperative: Financing for Better Growth 
Summary for Policymaker and Development.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 9Partnership, North America has the capacity, 
resources, and the moral imperative to show 
strong leadership building on the Paris Agreement, 
which entered into force on November 4, 2016. We 
recognize that our highly integrated economies and 
energy systems afford a tremendous opportunity 
to harness growth in our continuing transition to a 
clean energy economy. Our actions to align climate 
and energy policies will protect human health 
and help level the playing field for our businesses, 
households, and workers. 
In recognition of our close ties and shared vision, 
Canada has worked closely with the U.S. and 
Mexico in the development of this report, including 
sharing analyses and key insights. Our partners’ 
respective Mid-Century Low-GHG Emissions 
Development Strategies outline ambitious mitigation 
action by 2050.
1 4  Encouraging international efforts, 
including reducing emissions in  
other countries will be key to the  
global response 
The Paris Agreement recognises that addressing 
climate change through adaptation, technology, 
and capacity building will require significant 
international cooperation and finance, especially 
in the context of sustainable development. 
International collaboration is also fundamental 
to building an innovation and knowledge  
based economy. 
Collaboration on technology innovation will 
underpin successful global efforts.  The Carbon 
Trust, a global leading think tank on GHG emissions 
and energy technologies, was commissioned by 
the United Kingdom to analyse the benefits of 
energy technology innovation. Their paper United 
Innovations concludes that through collaborative 
energy technology innovation, “the world could 
save US$550 billion on the cost of deploying clean 
energy technologies over the next decade”.
International cooperation to mitigate greenhouse 
gas emissions will be fundamental to limiting 
temperature rise. This is because GHG abatement 
costs differ substantially from sector to sector and 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction, but the environmental 
benefits of reducing a given amount of emissions 
are always the same. Cooperating to mitigate 
emissions in the most cost effective areas will 
ensure that financial resources are used in the 
most efficient way, resulting in larger reductions in 
emissions per unit of capital investment. 
10 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYArticle 6 of the Paris Agreement recognises that  1 5  Working collaboratively with Indigenous 
countries may choose to use internationally  peoples by supporting their on-going 
transferred mitigation outcomes, including emissions  implementation of climate change 
trading, to help access more cost effective  initiatives will be key  Consultations with 
abatement opportunities, as well as to help  Indigenous communities must respect 
other countries mitigate emissions and promote  the constitutional, legal, and international 
sustainable development.  International market- obligations that Canada has for its 
based approaches to reduce emissions (e.g., linked  Indigenous peoples  
cap-and-trade programs; bilateral cooperative 
approaches; etc.) can stimulate cost effective and  There are a number of statements and agreements7 
economically efficient greenhouse gas mitigation.  that highlight Canada’s commitment to consult, 
Some regions of the world, including subnational  collaborate, and engage Indigenous peoples. Work to 
governments, are already working cooperatively,  address climate change and related interactions with 
or link carbon markets. These “bottom-up” type  Indigenous peoples, must be consistent with Canada’s 
approaches could continue to develop and grow  approach to implementing the United Nations 
moving forward. For example, the province of  Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous peoples, in 
Quebec has linked its emission trading system to  accordance with Canada’s constitution.
California’s through the Western Climate Initiative, 
This is especially relevant given the disproportionate 
with other subnational regions planning or 
challenges that First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
considering doing the same. By 2050, it is hoped that 
communities face because of climate change. Despite 
there will be an international emissions trading system 
the changes that are facing both traditional resources 
in place that would ensure robust environmental 
and the land, indigenous citizens and communities 
integrity and transparency at a global level.
alike are taking tangible steps to become active 
In Canada, there are challenges to reducing  drivers of change. For them, building resilience in the 
greenhouse gas emissions from emissions-intensive  face of climate change is fundamentally about food, 
heavy industry, primary extraction, and certain  water, and energy independence, where Indigenous 
applications in the transportation sector. In the short- communities are self-sufficient. 
to-medium term, there may be more cost effective 
Indigenous peoples, communities, and organisations 
GHG reduction opportunities in other sectors or 
across Canada are implementing a range of climate 
regions, where abatement technologies are more 
change initiatives.8 Above and beyond renewable 
effective or lower-GHG alternatives exist. Emissions 
energy projects, Indigenous peoples are implementing 
trading, or accessing internationally transferred 
ground-breaking initiatives on sustainable land use 
mitigation outcomes, can provide a lower cost 
management, food security, and education informed 
method of reducing GHG emissions, allowing more 
by traditional values. Advancing cross-cultural learning 
time for GHG intensive capital stock to turn over 
on climate change mitigation and adaptation is one 
and allow low-carbon alternatives to be introduced 
step in the journey towards reconciliation in Canada.
without stranding assets. Canada recognises that 
sustainable development is a key principle pertinent 
In order to move forward, Canada will encourage the 
to this type of cooperation. Canada will consider 
development of green infrastructure in northern and 
internationally transferred mitigation outcomes as 
remote Indigenous communities. It is also important 
a short-to-medium term complement to reducing 
for municipalities, provinces and territories to promote 
emissions at home. Likewise, Canada intends to take 
energy security for Indigenous peoples. For example, 
into account internationally transferred mitigation 
through its Feed-in Tariff program, Ontario has been 
outcomes arising from cross-border subnational 
able to set aside 10% for community and Indigenous 
emission trading as part of its international 
engagement in renewable energy projects, with many 
contribution to addressing climate change.  
Indigenous communities as partners or owners in 
renewable energy systems as a result.9 
7  For example: the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change’s Paris Agreement; the Vancouver Declaration; 
the Leader’s Statement on a North American Climate, Clean 
Energy, and Environment Partnership.
8   Scurr, C., and Beaudry, J., Gap Analysis First Nations Climate 
Change Adaptation South of 60 Degrees Latitude. 
9  Indigenous Economic Development Indigenous Affairs Working 
Group, Ontario Aboriginal Energy Partnerships Program.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 111 6  The Mid-Century Strategy will help inform  develop and implement strong, complementary 
the pan-Canadian framework (PCF) for  adaptation policies and action on climate resilience 
clean growth and climate change   to address climate risks facing our populations, 
infrastructure, economies and ecosystems, and 
On March 3, 2016, Canada’s First Ministers and  Canada’s northern regions in particular.  
Indigenous Leaders met in Vancouver and 
committed to developing a concrete plan to achieve  Canada’s Mid-Century Strategy will help inform 
Canada’s international greenhouse gas reduction  the pan-Canadian framework for Clean Growth 
commitments through a pan-Canadian framework  and Climate Change, but does not outline any 
for clean growth and climate change.  Canada’s  further specific policies. Instead, Canada’s Mid-
First Ministers released the Vancouver Declaration  Century Strategy outlines potential GHG abatement 
in which they agreed to build on commitments and  opportunities, emerging key technologies, and 
actions already taken by provinces and territories in  identifies areas where emissions reductions will be 
order to meet or exceed Canada’s GHG emissions  more challenging and require policy focus – in 
target for 2030. They highlighted the need to foster  the context of achieving very low greenhouse gas 
investment to promote clean economic growth  objectives by 2050. The strategy also outlines the 
and create jobs that support the transition to a  importance of addressing other pollutants, such as 
low-carbon economy, while benefitting individual  black carbon, that are significant climate warmers.
Canadians and addressing competitiveness 
impacts on businesses.  They committed to deliver 
mitigation actions by adopting a broad range 
of domestic measures, including carbon pricing 
mechanisms, adapted to each jurisdiction’s specific 
circumstances. Commitments were also made to 
12 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY2  Existing Analyses on Decarbonisation
The study and analysis of what low-carbon futures might look like and the pathways for 
how we might achieve them is relatively recent.  There is, however, a rapidly growing 
body of international research on low-carbon futures, including a few analyses 
that have focused on Canada.  From this work, a number of common themes and 
conclusions have emerged that inform the development of this report. This work involves 
examining various pathways that Canada can take to achieve a low-carbon economy 
in 2050 and identifying associated opportunities and challenges. The studies also 
highlight Canada’s achievements in decreasing GHG emissions to-date, provide wide-
ranging insights on potential transformational low-emitting GHG technologies, and point 
to policies and measures that could be implemented to achieve deep reductions in 
GHG emissions and the necessary innovation required to ease this transition.
This literature review aims to highlight the principle themes and key messages from 
relevant research in order to inform the development of Canada’s Mid-Century Low 
GHG Strategy. The review focuses on Canada-wide approaches and does not consider 
provincial-level pathway assessments. 
KEY MESSAGES: 
•  Substantial decarbonisation by mid-century is possible with  
current technologies. 
•  Decarbonisation presents opportunities to improve social welfare and 
economic productivity. 
•  Challenging areas for abatement require increased policy focus, research 
and development, and investment. 
•  Decarbonisation objectives should underlie long-term, coordinated 
planning in key areas such as investments towards new infrastructure and 
clean technologies. 
2 1  Substantial decarbonisation by mid-century is possible with  
current technologies 
Canada has already started to decarbonise and can do even more with currently 
available technologies. In its Canada 2015 review, the International Energy Agency 
(IEA) mentions that Canada has achieved important reductions to date through federal 
and provincial/territorial initiatives. The report underlines that in 2013, more than 75% of 
Canada’s current electricity generation mix is non-emitting due to significant production 
from hydro and nuclear and that, over the past decade, Canada has decreased its 
energy intensity by 20%. It also mentions the progress made in the industrial sector with 
four carbon and capture storage projects, including the Boundary Dam CCS project, 
which is the world’s first commercial application of CCS to a coal-fired power plant.10 
An assessment from the Council of Canadian Academies published in 2015 suggests 
that Canada can significantly reduce GHG emissions by using commercially available 
technologies in key sectors of the economy.11 The assessment identifies many existing 
10   International Energy Agency, Energy Policies of IEA Countries: Canada 2015 Review, p. 10.
11  Council of Canadian Academies, Technology and Policy Options for a Low-Emission Energy  
System in Canada.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 13technologies that are able to achieve further energy  improvements and cost reductions”.13 These include 
efficiency improvements and increase production  expanding the use of non-emitting electricity across 
of non-emitting electricity. These technologies are  end-use sectors, increasing the use of biofuels in 
commercially available, can deepen current energy  the transportation sector, and improving energy 
efficiency improvements, and further decarbonise  conservation and efficiency. The report also noted 
the electricity generation sector. The report also  that further research is needed on ways to achieve 
highlights the opportunity to stimulate the low carbon  net-negative GHG emissions, including through 
transition at the time of infrastructure renewal. bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (BECCS), 
increased use of wood products for carbon retention 
The Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project12 is  in buildings, and carbon sequestration through 
a global initiative of 16 countries covering 74% of  afforestation and reforestation.
energy emissions that aims at providing country 
specific pathways to meet a mitigation goal  The Canadian study Acting on Climate Change: 
consistent with limiting global temperatures to 2°C  Solutions from Canadian Scholars also provides 
above pre-industrial levels. The project suggests  an insight into how current technologies and 
that current and developing technologies can  appropriate policy options are sufficient to 
achieve decarbonisation if sufficiently broad,  decarbonise the Canadian economy.  A concerted 
wide, and nationally appropriate climate policy  effort of sixty Canadian scholars, the report suggests 
is imposed. The Canadian study published in 2015  that Canada can rely 100% on low-carbon electricity 
provides six decarbonisation pathways, several  production by 2035, due to the availability of 
of which rely on pushing deployment of currently  renewable energy sources in the country, making 
available technologies. The results suggest that  it possible to achieve an 80% reduction in GHG 
Canada can make significant progress through the  emissions by 2050. In addition, an evolving smart 
decarbonisation of the electricity grid using mainly  urban design, drastic changes in the transportation 
renewable energy sources (e.g., hydro, wind, solar),  sector and a broader sustainability agenda are all 
some fossil fuels with CCS, and replacement of  fundamental factors that will help change energy 
combustion-based energy sources with electricity in  consumption in Canada. To this end the authors 
many sectors (including the transportation, buildings,  suggest numerous policies, such as east-west 
manufacturing, and heavy industry sectors).   The  interprovincial electricity trade, and emphasise the 
study employed a highly detailed, behaviourally  benefit of a carbon pricing policy.
realistic technology stock turnover model (CIMS) 
to capture changes in energy, process an fugitive 
2 2  Decarbonisation presents opportunities 
emissions, linked to regionally and sectorally 
to improve social welfare and economic 
disaggregated macroeconomic model (RGEEM) 
productivity  
to capture changes in GDP, economic structure, 
employment and trade. Emissions reductions in  The Smart Prosperity roadmap, New thinking, 
both models were driven by a policy package of  provides a vision of Canada’s potential low-carbon 
performance based technology regulations and  future with healthy, vibrant, and green communities. 
hybrid (i.e., general tax and cap and trade)   The Canadian think tank proposes a future Canadian 
carbon pricing. society in which smart cities and towns provide 
sustainable means of living in communities with 
The Trottier Energy Futures Project looks at 11 different 
hyper-efficient insulated buildings with roof tiles 
scenarios for Canada to achieve different levels 
made of solar panels, plenty of public parks and 
of GHG reductions by 2050 using one optimisation 
community gardens, and streets and sidewalks filled 
model and one simulation model that integrate 
with electric plug-in stations for next-generation 
energy and economic systems with different sets 
electric cars. In this green economy, clean innovation 
of strategies to achieve reductions at a minimum 
would provide many job opportunities using human 
cost. The projections presented in the report provide 
ingenuity to efficiently produce goods and services 
detailed information on Canada’s sectoral energy 
while continuously seeking new ways to reduce 
consumption and production for each scenario and 
greenhouse gas emissions. Smart grid systems 
take into account specific regional circumstances. 
endowed with advanced technologies would 
The report states that “for most scenarios, the 
allow home appliances, such as water heaters, to 
approach was based on currently deployed 
act as electric batteries and transportation modes 
technologies with plausible extrapolations for future 
13  Trottier Energy Futures Project, Canada’s Challenge & 
12  Bataille, C. et al., Pathways to Deep Decarbonization in Canada. Opportunity, p. 6.
14 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYto recharge and start their duties at inexpensive,  by 45% while decreasing levels of air pollution which 
low-peak load times. Under this vision, connected  result in improvements in human health. Vehicle users 
communities could become more efficient by  also incur fuel savings.17
sharing resources and knowledge. The roadmap 
states that Canada’s future prosperity depends on  Data analysed in the 2016 Canadian Clean 
the investment choices we make today and that  Technology Industry Report, published by Analytica 
the development of clean infrastructures will “offer  Advisors, suggests that the Canadian clean 
substantial economic opportunities for Canadian  technology sector has grown considerably over 
companies, many of which are already among the  the last decade and that a pathway toward 
leaders in energy technology, water infrastructure,  decarbonisation would further stimulate the sector by 
and transportation innovation”.14  increasing domestic demand for clean technologies, 
thereby developing domestic knowledge and 
A transition to a low-carbon economy could present  innovation. The report mentions that the Canadian 
significant benefits beyond GHG abatement that  clean technology sector delivers “high-skill, high-
could improve Canadian’s well-being by producing  wage, knowledge-based jobs”18 and that it continues 
jobs in the clean technology industry and improving  to out-perform other industries on that aspect. Clean 
productivity in other sectors. The International Energy  technologies can also increase the productivity 
Agency (IEA) report Energy Technology Perspectives  and efficiency of other sectors of the economy, 
(ETP) 2016 underscores Canadian success stories.15   including traditional industries, and make them more 
For example, in Alberta, the Drake Landing Solar  competitive. Nevertheless, the report also highlights 
Community (DLSC) integrates solar thermal energy to  that these same Canadian companies are losing 
its district system to store significant amount energy  market share world-wide, and that moving swiftly 
underground during the summer so it can be used  towards decarbonisation could provide significant 
in the winter for space heating. According to the  opportunities to the sector.
DLSC, each of the single family homes reduces about 
The Trottier Energy Futures Project also points to 
5 tonnes of GHG per year and is 30% more efficient 
than conventionally built homes.16 Another success  other kind of economic opportunities, such as 
taking advantage of potential mutual benefits from 
story relates to the use of applications for traffic 
a greater integration of the electricity network 
signals (e.g., communications systems, adaptive 
and trade between the U.S. and Canada. More 
control systems, traffic-responsible, real-time data 
specifically, Quebec could increase exports of 
collection and analysis, maintenance management 
zero-emitting electricity to the U.S. North East 
systems) in British Columbia to allow motorists to turn 
region, and Manitoba could do the same with the 
off their engines while they wait at the Peace Arch 
U.S. Mid-West region. The benefits include higher 
Border Crossing. The system reduces GHG emissions 
electricity sale revenues for Quebec and Manitoba 
and lower cost electricity supply for American States, 
14  Smart Prosperity, New Thinking-Canada’s Roadmap to Smart 
Prosperity, p. 50. opportunities for optimal integrated system dispatch 
15  International Energy Agency, Energy Technology Perspectives,  
p. 199, p. 231 & p. 326. 17  Government of British Colombia, Greening the Border.
16  Drake Landing Solar Community, Welcome to Drake Landing  18  International Energy Agency, Energy Technology Perspectives 
Solar Community. 2016, p. XXII.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 15which could generate revenue through trading  predictability to attract new durable investments 
of energy, minimised overall cost of system supply  in clean technology and innovation. The report 
(complementing Canadian hydro production with  proposed to establish an economy wide price signal, 
U.S. low cost nuclear and thermal baseload), the  through a market-based policy. The NRTEE also 
sharing of emergency reserve, and a more stable  highlights the need to create a level playing field 
system. The report also mentions that there may be  for energy investments with the goal of enhancing 
further opportunities for reducing overall electricity  Canadian firms’ access to fast-growing low-carbon 
costs since the peak demands in Canada and the  markets and mobilising investments in low-carbon 
U.S. occur at different periods of the year (most of  infrastructure and technology.
Canadian provinces’  peak periods are in the winter, 
while U.S. peak period is in the summer), and for  Mark Jacobson from Stanford University and other 
complementing the baseload with more   researchers have also looked at energy roadmaps to 
intermittent renewables.19  convert 139 countries to 100% clean and renewable 
energy use. The roadmaps represent pathways for 
converting the energy systems of these countries to 
2 3  Challenging areas for abatement require 
ones powered by wind, water, and sunlight (WWS). 
increased policy focus, research and 
The roadmaps are based on IEA energy consumption 
development, and investment  
data projected to a 2050 BAU scenario. They rely on 
existing WWS electricity generation technologies and 
Decarbonisation pathways also present challenges 
exclude nuclear, CCS, biofuels or natural gas, and do 
which require effective and flexible policies that 
not include the construction of new  
encourage innovation. The academic literature 
hydropower dams.
stresses the need for Canada to capitalise on its 
vast knowledge and expertise to spur innovation 
In the wake of the COP21 Conference, the Royal 
and develop clean technologies to cost-effectively 
Dutch Shell company published the report A Healthy 
reduce emissions in some areas, particularly industrial 
Planet: Pathways to Net-Zero Emissions: A New Lens 
process emissions and freight transportation. In order 
Scenarios Supplement. The report highlights current 
to succeed in making major scientific breakthroughs 
societal challenges in achieving a net zero GHG 
and ensuring clean reliable energy systems, the 
world. The report recognises the important role of 
literature emphasises the need for private and public 
renewable energy in decarbonising the energy 
actors to strengthen research, development and 
system but points out other challenges that many 
deployment (RD&D) in all sectors of the economy, 
industrial sectors are facing (e.g., iron and steel, 
and continuously engage with the international 
cement manufacturing, heavy freight and air 
community. In their 2015 report, the Council of 
transportation, chemical and fertilizers). To make 
Canadian Academies provides an overview of 
progress on reducing these emission sources, the 
the key challenges faced by industries. These are 
report suggests mass deployment of carbon capture 
mainly associated with the lack of cost-effective, 
and storage technologies combined with sustainable 
low emission-intensive ways to produce high levels 
biomass use. The report also recommends policies 
of heat, and that energy-related emissions are 
to accelerate the world’s transition to a low-
scattered across many different processes and 
carbon economy including economy-wide carbon 
applications. The report points to R&D, technological 
pricing and financial investment for research and 
development, and flexible policies as key solutions to 
development in low-carbon technologies.
reduce the costs and encourage commercialisation 
of low-emitting technologies.
The National Round Table on the Environment 
and the Economy (NRTEE) provided their 
recommendations in a report titled Getting to 2050: 
Canada’s Transition to a Low-emission Future.  
The report established many “enabling conditions” 
which would guide Canada in formulating a long-
term strategy to achieve its long-term GHG emission 
and air pollution targets. The report pointed out 
that long term policy certainty is central to provide 
19  Trottier Energy Futures Project, Canada’s Challenge & 
Opportunity, pp. 217-224.
16 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY2 4  Decarbonisation objectives should underlie 
long-term, coordinated planning in key 
areas such as investments towards new 
infrastructure and clean technologies  
Smart Prosperity’s roadmap stresses the importance 
of building smart infrastructure to facilitate the 
penetration of clean transportation modes and non-
emitting energy. The roadmap also points to municipal 
governments having a key role in planning zoning 
and permitting in order to favour clean development 
of cities. This vision will require strong coordination 
from federal and provincial governments, National 
Indigenous Organisations across the country, 
municipalities, and the public.
As cities are becoming the heart of economic 
development and strategic centres for innovation in 
clean technologies, they offer significant opportunities 
to contribute to reducing GHG emissions. IEA’s Energy 
Technology Perspectives (ETP) 2016 presents an 
extensive modelling exercise including projections 
of three pathways using four interlinked models 
of the energy supply, and the buildings, industry, 
and transport sectors. The results present the 
structural changes required to shift the world toward 
clean energy and transform cities into innovation 
powerhouses. The report also highlights the role cities 
play in driving energy demand and the solutions they 
may offer to lower the carbon content of the world’s 
energy systems. According to the report, increasing 
energy demand from urban economic and population 
growth will need to go hand in hand with innovation 
and massive deployment of clean technologies and 
significant behavioral changes. It also emphasises the 
role of cities in supporting higher efficiency transport 
and buildings, with dense urban development being 
a structural prerequisite. Increased demands in 
space heating and cooling could be decoupled by 
connecting households to district energy networks. 
Sustainable land-use planning, the implementation 
and electrification of transportation modes, and the 
installation of rooftop solar photovoltaics present 
attractive solutions to propel cities toward a low-
carbon pathway. All of these solutions will require 
careful planning of today’s investments in infrastructure 
by all levels of government.
The report from the Council of Canadian Academies 
also mentions that many investment decisions such 
as transmission and distribution systems and strategic 
planning of urban, land-use and infrastructure 
developments will allow for a better integration of low-
emitting electricity use. 
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 173  Decarbonisation and Expansion of 
Canada’s Electricity System 
KEY MESSAGES:
•  Canada’s electricity generating portfolio is already more than 80% 
non-GHG emitting, with the trend towards cleaner generation expected 
to continue. This provides Canada with an international comparative 
advantage relative to countries seeking to decarbonise their fossil fuel 
dominated portfolios.
•  A low carbon electricity system will allow for GHG emissions reductions in 
other sectors (e.g., transportation, buildings, industrial processes) through 
electrification. The anticipation of significant growth in electricity demand 
should underpin long term investment and planning.
•  Further decarbonisation of the electricity sector will facilitate the transition 
to a low-GHG future. Non-emitting sources will need to be considered 
for all new and existing needs, but generating portfolios will differ from 
one jurisdiction to another. Regional differences will need to be a key 
consideration for electricity climate change policies. 
•  Interprovincial, interjurisidictional, and intercontinental cooperation will 
enhance integration of clean electricity generation to satisfy growing 
demand. Canada’s contribution towards global GHG abatement could 
include providing clean power to our continental neighbours, as well as 
clean power services to the international community.  
•  Energy conservation and energy efficiency measures should increase and 
be implemented alongside efforts to reduce emissions from electricity 
generation. Electricity savings should underlie decarbonisation pathways: 
demand side management and reducing equipment and transmission 
losses makes electrification far more effective and feasible
3 1  Canada’s electricity generating portfolio is already more than 80% non-
GHG emitting, with the trend towards cleaner generation expected 
to continue  This provides Canada with an international comparative 
advantage relative to countries seeking to decarbonise their fossil fuel 
based portfolios
Canada already has one of the cleanest electricity systems in the world, with more 
than 80% of electricity generated from sources that do not produce greenhouse gas 
emissions such as hydro, wind, solar, and nuclear power. Canadian rivers provide 
immense hydroelectric generating capability, and Canada is second largest producer 
of hydroelectricity globally. In 2014, Canada produced 379 terawatt hours (TWh) 
of hydroelectricity, representing 9.8% of global production20 with further capacity 
remaining untapped. There is also significant potential for the development of other 
renewable energy sources across Canada.
20   National Energy Board, Canada’s Energy Future 2016: Energy Supply and Demand Projections to 2040.
18 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYFigure 1: Canadian Utility by Source (2014) As the global community moves to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions, many countries will face 
challenges with regard to the decarbonisation of 
their electricity generating sectors. In this respect, 
Canada is already ahead of many of its peers. 
Currently, Canada is the second largest producer 
of hydropower after China, fourth globally for 
generation from a combination of hydro, wind, 
solar and biomass,21 and sixth for generation 
from nuclear energy.22 Given this comparative 
advantage, Canada has the opportunity to increase 
its clean electricity exports, as well as leverage its 
expertise in current and emerging technologies 
(e.g., electrification technologies; smart grids for 
intermittent sources) that could help other countries 
reduce their emissions. 
3 2  A low-carbon electricity system will 
allow for GHG emissions reductions 
in other sectors (e g , transportation, 
buildings, and industrial processes) 
through electrification. The anticipation of 
significant growth in electricity demand 
In 2014, nuclear power provided 18% of Canada’s 
should underpin long term investment  
electricity generation from electric utilities (63% of 
and planning
Ontario’s generation and 34% of New Brunswick’s 
generation). Canada is the world’s second-largest 
Although electricity generation only accounted 
producer and exporter of uranium—representing 
for 11% of Canada’s emissions in 2014, continuing to 
over 20% of world production—and ranks fourth 
move towards a non-emitting electricity generating 
globally in identified resources of uranium. There are 
sector would help decarbonise other sectors, such as, 
4 operating nuclear power stations in Canada—3 in 
transportation and buildings. Increasing the share of 
Ontario and 1 in New Brunswick, with a combined 
non-emitting electricity generation is fundamental to 
total of 19 reactors. In Ontario, planned investments 
Canada’s low-carbon future.
of $25 billion over the next 15 years will extend the life 
of 10 nuclear reactors for another 25 to 30 years. A near decarbonisation of the electricity sector is 
underscored in most of the deep-decarbonisation 
Electricity-related emissions have been declining 
literature, both nationally and internationally. For 
in Canada due to a return to service of a number 
example, in the IEA Energy Technology Perspective 
of nuclear units, fuel switching from coal to natural 
2016, the global electricity power sector is almost 
gas, and government policies to phase out coal-
completely decarbonised by 2050 under a scenario 
fired electricity. This trend is expected to continue as 
consistent with the global 2°C temperature goal. 
hydropower generation and electricity generation 
Domestically, virtually all of the academic and expert 
from renewables, such as wind and solar, are 
analysis on deep decarbonisation in Canada point 
expected to increase throughout Canada. 
to non-emitting electricity and the electrification of 
buildings and passenger vehicles as fundamental 
Although electricity generation is already moving in 
aspects to a low-carbon future given current 
a positive direction with respect to a low-GHG future, 
technologies. For example, the Trottier Energy Futures 
government policy and long-term planning can help 
Project shows that one of the lowest cost options 
accelerate this trend. For example, as Canadian 
to decarbonise Canada is to move the electricity 
provinces continue to move away from coal-fired 
generation sector toward a zero-emitting transition 
electricity, they will face decisions regarding what 
by expanding renewables, especially hydro, and 
type of fuel should replace and augment generating 
other non-emitting sources. 
capacity. Natural gas might provide a lower-GHG 
option than coal in the short run, but its place in a 
decarbonised system is less clear over a  
21  International Energy Association, IEA’s Electricity  
longer-term horizon. Information Report.
22   Nuclear Energy Institute, Top 10 Nuclear Generating Countries.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 19The near term focus on mitigation in this sector also  Table 1: Average Levelised Costs of Electricity (2015 
reflects the technological availability of abatement  $/MWh) for Plants Entering Service in 2022 & 2040; 
options including the ability to tackle large point  United States26
sources of emissions over a shorter time period. From 
an investment perspective, Canada is at a point  Energy Source 2022 2040
in time where its traditional coal-fired generating 
Wind 64.5 58.8
sources are facing closures or refurbishments 
Wind Offshore 158.1 133.7
with carbon capture and storage, primarily due 
to government policies; therefore, there is an  Natural  58.1 57.6
opportunity to transition to a decarbonised system at  Gas-fired 
more limited incremental cost.  Conventional 
Combined 
Meanwhile, the price of renewable electricity such  Cycle
as wind and solar continues to decline dramatically,  Hydroelectric 67.8 65.3
making these options increasingly economically 
Advanced  102.8  93 
attractive. Recent Bloomberg New Energy Finance 
Nuclear
analysis projects the levelised cost of electricity for 
Biomass 96.1 78.7
onshore wind and photovoltaics solar to decrease 
by 41% and 59%, respectively, from 2016 to 2040.23 The  Geothermal 45.0 57.0
levelised cost of electricity (LCOE) is an economic  Solar  84.7 71.2
assessment of the average total cost to build and  Photovoltaics
operate a power-generating asset over its lifetime 
Coal with CCS 139.5 125.8
divided by the total energy output of the asset over 
that lifetime. It can also be regarded as the minimum 
3 3  Further decarbonisation of the electricity 
cost at which electricity must be sold in order to 
sector will facilitate the transition to a low 
break-even over the lifetime of the project.   
GHG future  Non-emitting sources will 
The U.S. Energy Information Agency (EIA) describes  need to be considered for all new and 
the average levelised costs for plants entering service  existing needs, but generating portfolios 
in 2022 and 2040 in the U.S. (see Table 1). The EIA  will differ from one jurisdiction to another  
notes that some renewables such as wind power are  Regional differences will need to be a 
expected to be cheaper than fossil-fuel based forms of  key consideration for electricity climate 
generation within the U.S by 2022.  These costs take into  change policies  
account building and operating a plant over its lifetime, 
fuel costs (where appropriate) and the federal tax  Modeling analyses that examine deep aggregate 
burden, but do not include regional factors or utilisation  cuts to GHG emissions in Canada by mid-century 
rates. Government subsidies are not included in the  indicate that Canada’s future non-emitting 
estimates but would decrease the costs even further.24 It  electricity portfolio could take various forms, 
should be emphasized that these are future costs in the  and different non-emitting options exist for each 
United States and cannot be directly compared   Canadian jurisdiction. The following section outlines 
to Canada. the various scenarios developed around non-
emitting electricity generation scenarios for Canada 
In Canada, the Canadian Council on Renewable  and explains the modelling results of each scenario.
Electricity (CanCORE)25 states that hydropower and 
wind are already cost-competitive. Solar energy is 
quickly catching up and is on track to be the least-cost 
generation technology in most countries around the 
world by 2030. 
23  Bloomberg New Energy Finance, Coal and Gas to Stay Cheap, 
but Renewables Still Win Race on Costs.
24  U.S. Energy Information Administration, Levelized Cost and 
Levelized Avoided Cost of New Generation Ressources in the 
Annual Energy Outlook 2016. 26  U.S. Energy Information Administration, Levelized Cost and 
25  Canadian Council on Renewable Electricity, Powering Prosperity  Levelized Avoided Cost of New Generation Ressources in the 
Climate Report. Annual Energy Outlook 2016.
20 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYMODEL AND SCENARIO DESCRIPTION 
Deep Decarbonisation Pathways Project – High Ambition (DDPP): 
Ambition:
The DDPP modelled its scenarios in line with achieving 89% GHG emission reductions from overall 
emission levels projected for 2050, excluding agriculture, which corresponds to an emissions reduction 
of 88% from 2015 levels by 2050 (78Mt CO e).
2
Model Description:
The DDPP uses an energy and economic model to forecast demand for GHG-intensive goods and 
services, energy balances, technology and ultimately emissions (CIMS model). CIMS is a bottom-
up technology-focused model that competes and selects technology market shares based on firm 
and household responses to the DDPP policy package, including carbon pricing and technology 
regulations. To forecast GDP, employment, economic structure and trade, a macroeconomic regionally 
and sectorally disaggregated Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model called GEEM, is used.
Scenario Description:
•  This modelling work assumes GDP growth ranging from 2% to 2.2% per year from 2015 to 2050.
•  The scenario discussed here is based on oil prices of $80 ($US2014) per barrel in 2050.
Trottier  Energy Futures Project:
Ambition:
The Trottier Energy Futures Project modelled its scenarios based on achieving a 60% GHG emission 
reduction target from the 1990 levels in combustion emissions. This corresponds to a 65% reduction from 
2015 combustion emission levels. This analysis excludes process emissions. Scenarios 3 (Current Tech 
Trottier) and 8 (New Tech Trottier) of the report are shown in this section. 
Model Description:
The Trottier Energy Futures Project uses two models to develop its scenarios, the North American TIMES 
Energy Model (NATEM) and CanESS models. Both models include separate representations of the 
sectors in Canada’s economy, split for all provinces and territories.
Scenario Description:
•  Scenarios 3 (Current Tech Trottier) and 8 (New Tech Trottier) of the report are shown, both of which 
aim to achieve a 60% GHG emission reduction target from the 1990 levels in the energy sector.
•  This work relies on the National Energy Board’s GDP per capita growth rate from 2010 to 2035, which 
is 1.9%, with somewhat slower growth after 2035.
•  This modelling exercise assumes an oil price of about $135 ($2011) per barrel in 2050.
Environment and Climate Change Canada: Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM) –  
High Non-Emitting:
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 21Ambition:
This modelling work was based on a net 80% GHG emission reduction from 2005 levels. This is modelled 
as a combination of full reductions achieved in the combustion and non-combustion sectors, as well 
as the addition of scenarios representing a 65% reduction in Canadian economy emissions, with a 15% 
achievement through Internationally Transferable Mitigation Outcomes and Land sector credits.
Model Description:
GCAM is a dynamic-recursive model with technology-rich representations of the economy, energy 
sector, land use and water linked to a climate model. GCAM is a Representative Concentration 
Pathway class model that can be used to simulate scenarios, policies, and emission targets from various 
sources.
Scenario Description:
The first scenario (High Nuclear) is heavily dependent on nuclear electricity production, while the 
second scenario (High Hydro) relies on a mix of hydro and wind to produce a majority of its electricity 
generation. 
•  This modelling work was based on a 65% and net 80% GHG emission reduction from 2005 levels.
Environment and Climate Change Canada:  Computable General Equilibrium Model (CGE) – High 
Demand Response:
Ambition:
•  This modelling work was based on a net 80% GHG emission reduction from 2005 levels. This is 
modelled as a combination of full reductions achieved in the combustion and non-combustion 
sectors, as well as the addition of scenarios representing a 65% reduction in Canadian economy 
emissions, with a 15% achievement through with the addition of scenarios including Internationally 
Transferable Mitigation Outcomes and Land sector credits.
Model Description:
•  This is a multi-sector, multi-regional open-economy recursive-dynamic computable general 
equilibrium model of the global economy. The model captures characteristics of country-
specific or regional production and consumption patterns through a detailed input-output table 
and links countries/regions via bilateral trade. The model incorporates rich detail in energy use 
and greenhouse gas emissions related to the combustion of fossil fuels and tracks non-energy 
related greenhouse gas emissions. Economic activities in regions involve 28 industrial sectors, final 
consumption by the household, the governments and investment.
22 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYIn the figure below, results from these scenarios are  Depending on the modelling scenario, there is 
presented with respect to electricity generation.  a huge variation in potential electricity demand 
Comparing results across models, or across modelled  growth. This is dependent on the level of energy 
scenarios, provides us with overarching high- efficiency/consumption changes emerging from 
level messages and key takeaways for Canada’s  the modelling results. However, in all of the low GHG 
decarbonised electricity sector. The graph depicts  economy modelling analyses, non-emitting sources 
various electricity generating portfolios in the year  such as hydro, nuclear, wind, and solar replace fossil 
2050 from the four different models, and compares  fuel generation well before mid-century. 
these to the current generating mix (2014), labelled 
All scenarios demonstrate growth in hydropower 
as “Historical” in the graph. 
electricity generation between 2013 and 2050. The 
In all of the scenarios, Canadian electricity  ECCC High Hydro scenario illustrates a 172% increase 
generation will increase substantially to fulfill end-use  in hydropower generation. In the DDPP analyses, 
electrification requirements. Essentially, additional  hydro increases by 120%, whereas in the Trottier 
electricity is required to power cars, light trucks,  analyses it increases by 134% in both scenarios.
buildings, and industrial production processes 
that are switching away from fossil fuel generation 
to electricity to power their needs. In the ECCC 
analyses, total electricity generation increases by 113 
to 189% between 2013 and 2050, whereas it increases 
by 184 to 295% in the Trottier analyses and by 160% in 
the DDPP analyses. 
Figure 2: Scenarios of Canada’s Non-Emitting Electricity Generating Supply 
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 23Figure 3: Canada’s installed hydro power capacity against theoretical technical potential (MW), and installed 
wind power: by province and territory in 2014; 
Source: International Energy Agency28
The different scenarios correspond to different  hydro power capacity, indicating that this type of 
levels of additional hydro capacity that needs  generation could be possible. The DDPP modelling 
to be built by 2050 to reach the greenhouse gas  exercise is 29% below technical potential, whereas 
mitigation objectives. The DDPP scenario requires  both Trottier scenarios are 25% under this threshold. 
about 101,500 MW of additional capacity, while  The High Nuclear scenario is 52% under technical 
the Trottier scenarios require about 111,000 MW of  potential, while the High Hydro scenario is closer, at 
additional capacity. ECCC’s High Nuclear scenario  13%. Finally, ECCC’s high Demand Response scenario 
would require 36,000 MW of capacity to be built,  is 22% below the technical potential of hydro power.
while the High Hydro scenario would require 130,000 
MW to be built. Finally, ECCC’s High Demand  Hydro power also provides a good “coupling” to 
Response modelling run indicates that 108,000 MW of  intermittent sources generated by renewables 
additional capacity would need to be built. such as wind and solar power. Since renewable 
electricity is generated at intervals when the wind 
Although this is a significant increase in hydropower  is blowing or the sun is shining, a high degree of 
capacity, a study conducted for the Canadian  coverage of electricity demand by wind or solar is 
Hydropower Association shows that in 2006 Canada  possible only with access to energy storage or an 
had 160 GW of hydro potential, a large portion  adequate complementary form of electricity that 
of which is economically viable. Canadian rivers  can be ramped-up during periods of low generation. 
provide close to 7% of the world’s renewable water  Fortunately, hydroelectric plants are well suited for 
supply and this resource provides tremendous  this in Canada, and can store water in hydroelectric 
hydroelectric generating capability.27 Currently,  reservoirs that could be used when solar or wind 
over 10 GW of hydro capacity have been proposed  generation is not available. 
or planned in Canada, tapping the Churchill, 
Hydro power may have negative implications,  
Nelson, Slave, Athabasca, and Peace river systems. 
mainly based on the impact of dams on fisheries  
Over 3500 MW of this capacity is already under 
construction in Canada. 28 and water flows since dam reservoirs have an impact 
on flows, temperatures, and silt loads of rivers and 
Figure 3 depicts the theoretical technical potential  streams. There have been examples of large dams 
for hydro power generation by province. The above  blocking migrating fish from reaching their spawning 
scenarios are all below the technical potential of  grounds. For these reasons, the construction of future 
large hydro projects will require careful  
27  National Energy Board, Canada’s Energy Future 2016: Energy  consultation processes. 
Supply and Demand Projections to 2040
28  International Energy Agency, Energy Policies of IEA Countries: 
2015 Canadian Review.
24 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYGenerally, further innovation will be required if  significant increase in nuclear power between now 
hydro power is to increase substantially in Canada.29   and 2050. Scenarios from the Trottier analyses show 
However, much of this increase in hydropower  nuclear growing to about the same level as ECCC’s 
generation can be accomplished without building  High Nuclear scenario, although it grows slightly less 
new dams. Many technologies allow for an increase in  for the New Technologies scenario, which assumes 
electricity generation from existing hydro dams, such  less electricity generation needs based on energy 
as through increased efficiency turbines, at a relatively  efficiency technologies. 
low cost.
The amount of nuclear capacity from the ECCC High 
While hydro power increases in all scenarios,  Nuclear scenario, as well as the Current Tech Trottier 
nuclear energy varies depending on the modelling  scenario, corresponds to 797 TWh of generation 
assumptions. The ECCC High Hydro scenario, assumes  per year in 2050, which is much higher than the 
that nuclear power generation is maintained  current share of nuclear in the electricity mix, which 
at today’s levels, with the addition of expected  corresponds to about 98 TWh of generation.  There 
refurbishments. The DDPP assumes that existing  are significant challenges to building sizeable 
nuclear power is maintained, but no new capacity  infrastructure projects like these, mainly because of 
is added out to 2050. In comparison, under the  high capital costs, delays in construction, and other 
Trottier analyses as well as the second ECCC GCAM  potential issues. However, benefits to nuclear power 
analyses (High Nuclear) the model chooses a  include emissions free generations, reliable baseload 
capabilities, and a lower levelised cost of electricity. 
As such, new and emerging nuclear technologies 
29  Potvin, C. et al., Acting on Climate Change: Extending the 
Dialogue Among Canadians: Some reflections on Climate  could become an increasingly attractive option for a 
Change Response Policy.
POTENTIAL INNOVATIVE NUCLEAR TECHNOLOGIES
In the short term, Canadian Deuterium-Uranium (CANDU) reactors enable the use of alternative fuels in 
current nuclear generation. Canadian industry is currently working with China to run CANDU reactors on 
depleted uranium by-products and spent fuel recycled from other reactors. 
Canadian and international developers are working on Small Modular Reactors (SMRs), which are 
compact nuclear reactors that can be scaled to generate power to communities ranging from several 
hundred people up to 300,000 homes. Compared with conventional nuclear power plants, SMRs require 
lower capital investment and offer scalability, siting flexibility, and enhanced safety features—including 
passive features that could prevent meltdowns even in the absence of power. SMRs are seen as a 
potential replacement for coal-fired power plants, or as a complement to intermittent renewables in 
transitioning remote communities off of diesel generation.
A transition from uranium to thorium-based fuels is possible over the longer term. Thorium is three to four 
times as abundant as uranium, and thorium-based fuels could reduce the amount of nuclear waste 
produced by reactors. Advanced nuclear reactors, including those using thorium-based fuels, could 
also achieve higher efficiencies than existing nuclear plants. China is investing heavily into thorium 
technologies, including the potential for CANDU reactors—which can support thorium fuel cycles more 
readily than other currently-available reactor types—and development of an advanced thorium reactor 
it hopes to demonstrate within the next decade.
Nuclear fusion represents a potentially game-changing technology for clean energy. Fusion differs 
widely from fission, the process used in conventional nuclear power generation. A Canadian company is 
developing a novel fusion reactor that could unlock large amounts of energy from hydrogen, a near-
infinitely abundant resource on earth, in a process that would not generate any long-lived radioactive 
waste and entails no risk of a meltdown. For these reasons, nuclear fusion is a potentially transformative 
technology. While it still has hurdles to pass before making it to market, if it were to succeed, it would alter 
the landscape of clean energy permanently.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 25GHG-constrained energy system by 2050 (see feature  options, which could provide a boost to the solar 
box on Potential Innovative Nuclear Technologies).  industry in Canada (see box on energy storage).
Both ECCC High Non-Emitting scenarios point to a  In the Deep Decarbonisation Pathways Project 
higher penetration of wind energy. Wind energy  analyses, natural gas and coal with carbon capture 
generation in 2050 represents 154 TWh, 9% of total  and storage (CCS) technology is apparent throughout 
generation, in Scenario 1, and 228 TWh, 14% of total  the projection period. In Saskatchewan, CCS was 
generation, in Scenario 2. In comparison, wind energy  retrofitted to the Boundary Dam coal-fired electricity-
increases to 17% of the generating mix in the DDPP  generation plant in 2014 and is expected to generate 
analysis, whereas it increases to 24% in the Current  reductions of up to 1 megatonne CO per year. The 
2
Tech Trottier scenario and 8% in the New Tech Trottier  project, implemented by SaskPower, shows that 
scenario. Although these scenarios represent sizeable  generating reliable, low-emitting electricity using coal 
figures, a Pan-Canadian Wind Integration study30 has  is feasible. The project is key to better understanding 
demonstrated that Canada can reliably and cost- the technical, economic, and environmental 
effectively integrate enough wind energy to meet 35%  performance of CCS technology and could produce 
of Canada’s electricity demand.  worldwide spillover effects if other countries choose 
to implement similar projects. The DDPP analysis 
In both High Non-Emitting scenarios, solar power  also features natural gas generation with CCS as a 
generation increases significantly reaching levels of  significant proportion of electricity generation in 2050. 
18 TWh, 1% of total generation, and 99 TWh, 6% of  Although no large scale demonstration projects have 
total generation in 2050. In comparison, solar energy  gone forward with this technology, it has the benefit 
increases to 5% of the generating mix in the DDPP  of allowing CCS technology developed for coal 
analysis, and is only part of the solution for Alberta  electricity generation plants to extend to natural gas 
and Saskatchewan in select Trottier scenarios. The  generation, which provides more flexibility to utilities in 
Trottier project notes that when deriving minimum cost  reducing emissions from their generation. Furthermore 
solutions for electricity generation in Canada, solar did  natural gas with CCS is estimated to be generally 
not compete well with wind. cheaper than using coal with CCS because of the 
lower capital cost of natural gas plants and their lower 
However, the National Energy Board notes that 
GHG intensity.32 
Canada has a strong solar photovoltaic (PV) potential 
that is largely unexploited and that certain prairie 
Current Tech Trottier (in figure 2) models Canada’s 
cities including Regina, Calgary and Winnipeg have 
electricity generation with current technologies, 
well above-average solar potential. Furthermore, 
a better interconnection between provinces, and 
it noted that in much of Canada, solar potential is 
allows the use of lowest cost electricity technologies 
higher than in Germany, the country with the most 
available anywhere in Canada. In comparison, New 
installed solar PV capacity in the world  
Tech Trottier models the same GHG reduction target 
in 2014.31   with a set of new technologies reaching market, 
including CCS and energy efficiency technologies. 
In order to fully exploit Canada’s solar potential, solar 
This technology application results in energy efficiency 
PV generation must reach competitive delivery costs 
measures in end-use applications, reducing required 
to stimulate the large scale investments needed for 
electricity demand from 2,257 to 1,622 TWh between 
significant deployment. Incentive programs such as 
the two scenarios. 
Ontario’s Feed-in-Tariff and microFIT programs may 
determine the pace of growth of solar generation  Other renewable energies offer potential in the mid-
across Canada in the near term. Household  to-long term. For example, generating zero-emitting 
production of solar electricity through rooftop solar  electricity with geothermal power is possible using hot 
panels can also be beneficial and could provide  subsurface water or steam coming from underneath 
more electricity than the household uses, providing  the earth’s surface. Standard well drilling technology 
an opportunity to sell electricity back to the grid.  can provide access to high temperature sources and 
Fully realising the potential of distributed PV will  power to turbines that offer  
likely require utility investments to upgrade existing  reliable electricity.
distribution networks to handle two-way power 
flow. The NEB also highlights potential technological  Tidal energy is a type of renewable energy produced 
breakthroughs, such as utility-scale electricity storage  from ocean currents. Since tides are predictable, 
the generation potential of tidal energy is more 
30  GE Consulting Group, Pan-Canadian Wind Integration Study.
31  National Energy Board, Canada’s Energy Futures 2016: Energy  32  Bataille, C.  et. al., Policy Uncertainty and Diffusion of Carbon 
Supply and Demand Projections to 2040. Capture and Storage in an Optimal Region.
26 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYINDIGENOUS RENEWABLE ENERGY INITIATIVES
Indigenous peoples, communities and organisations across Canada are implementing a range of 
climate change initiatives.33  A database compiling Indigenous climate change initiatives has so far 
identified 79 renewable energy initiatives with a web-based presence, 16 of which are presented on the 
Nations’ or communities’ websites.34 Renewable energy initiatives can yield multiple benefits, such as 
protection of the land, air and water, while creating much-needed employment.
The T’Sou-ke Nation of Vancouver Island in British Columbia, dubbed Canada’s first Aboriginal Solar 
Community, developed three community-owned solar demonstration projects. These include a stand-
alone system with battery storage on a community office building, a grid-connected solar PV system 
that can be used as a backup power source, which that can sell surplus power back to the grid for 
communities that wish to have net-zero energy use, and a kilowatt grid-connected, net-metered solar 
PV system on the community canoe shed, which powers its administration buildings. Surplus energy 
created in summer is sold to the grid and bought back in winter. 
Additionally, the T’Sou-ke have installed solar hot water on 42 of the 86 private residences in the 
community, begun a comprehensive energy conservation program for all houses, and installed 
two solar-powered electric car charging points. The Government of Canada has just announced 
funding for a partnership between T’Sou-ke Nation and Schneider Electric to develop energy storage 
for a worldwide market. In Quebec, the First Nation’s political and administrative organisations of 
Mashteuiatsh, Pekuakamiulnuatsh Takuhikan, and the Regional County Municipalities of Maria-
Chapdelaine and Domaine-du-Roy in Saguenay-Lac-Saint-Jean have formed a non-profit 100% regional 
partnership to identify and develop renewable energy projects using a sustainable development 
approach. Since its creation, the partnership has contributed to the development of two mini hydro 
projects. Company profits are transferred to the communities. 
Many power project developments occur in the traditional territories of Indigenous Peoples and many 
in remote areas.  By proactively partnering in power developments, Indigenous Peoples can create 
long-term sustainable value for their members through investment, employment, infrastructure and new 
business opportunities. By working with the power developers at the earliest stages of project planning, 
indigenous communities have input into the design to meet local needs which include reducing 
environmental impacts. For example, “First Nations Power Authority” was mandated to facilitate the 
development of First Nations-led power projects and promote indigenous participation in procurement 
opportunities with the crown utility in Saskatchewan, SaskPower.35
predictable than that of wind and solar sources. energy. While trees and other plants grow, they absorb 
These water flows can turn underwater turbines  carbon from the atmosphere. Over time, the carbon 
without the use of dams or reservoirs.  Similarly, wave  dioxide sequestration from growing trees and plants 
energy is generated by harnessing the motion of  will offset the short-term carbon dioxide emission 
waves.  Canada has significant tidal and wave  from bioenergy, and could deliver substantial carbon 
energy resources, which can, in the future, contribute  savings when compared to fossil fuel use over time 
to emission free electricity generation. These  (see more on biomass in Chapter 6). 
technologies are currently at the demonstration stage 
and it is therefore too early to consider modelling their 
potential contribution to Canada’s energy mix.
Additionally, as an alternative to fossil fuels, biomass 
can be used to generate renewable and sustainable 
33  Assembly of First Nations, Gap Analysis First Nations Climate 
Change Adaptation South of 60 Degrees Latitude.
34  Sustainable Canadian Dialogues, Acting on Climate Change: 
Indigenous Innovation.
35  First Nations Power Authority; About First Nations Power Authority.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 27As mentioned, wind, solar, and run of river (or  3 4  Interprovincial, interjurisidictional, and 
low-head hydro) only produce electricity when  intercontinental cooperation will enhance 
their resource is available (e.g., when the wind is  integration of clean electricity generation 
blowing). For this reason, it is necessary to pair these  to satisfy growing demand  Canada’s 
technologies with hydro or other firm power sources,  contribution towards global GHG 
or with grid interties or management operations  abatement could include providing clean 
(see box on energy storage). Energy storage, grid  power to our continental neighbours, 
interconnects, and smart grids could improve grid- as well as clean power services to the 
stabilisation and buffer peak electricity demands,  international community   
which could in-turn, support a larger share of 
renewables in the electricity grid.36  Canada, and North America’s, electricity future 
will be shaped by interprovincial, interjurisdictional, 
Storage technologies and smart grids may also  and intracontinental cooperation. Since Canadian 
be particularly useful in incorporating renewable  provinces and territories have purview over energy 
technologies in remote and off-grid communities,  decisions within their jurisdictions, they have 
since they have the potential to reduce or eliminate  traditionally designed electricity infrastructure with 
transmission costs. Between today and 2050, it is likely  consideration towards meeting their own energy 
that significant developments will occur in storage  demands. However, interprovincial electricity trade 
technology with the potential to transform the   is becoming an important component of many 
energy system.  provinces’ supply and demand considerations.  This 
type of cooperation becomes more important when 
considering climate change objectives, including 
maximising use of non-emitting sources (e.g., hydro), 
as well as when increasing the amount of intermittent 
electricity sources in the grid (e.g., solar, wind, tidal, 
wave). The recent Ontario-Quebec Trade and 
36  National Energy Board, Canada’s Energy Future 2016: Energy 
Supply and Demand Projections to 2040. Cooperation Agreement provides a good example of 
37  International Energy Agency, Energy Policies of IEA Countries,  interprovincial electricity trade.
2015 Canada Review.
Figure 4: Electricity exports and imports between Canada and the U S , by province, 201438
28 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYExpansion of electricity grid interties could allow  This is expected to create a significant new market 
more areas with surplus hydropower, or other forms  opportunity for Canadian electricity exports and 
of non-emitting generation, to sell electricity to other  increase the profitability of various clean electricity 
provinces or U.S. States that rely on fossil fuels. The  projects, such as large hydroelectric facilities.
integration of electricity markets between Canada 
and the U.S. includes 35 physical interconnections  It will be important to maximise the benefits from 
crossing the border and over $2.3 billion in Canada- this trade from both an economic as well as a 
U.S. electricity trade revenue.38 In August 2015, the U.S.  global greenhouse gas standpoint. Under the North 
American Leaders’ Statement on Climate, Clean 
Environmental Protection Agency released the final 
Energy, and Environment Partnership, leaders 
version of the Clean Power Plan which could reduce 
announced a goal for North America to strive to 
GHG emissions from the U.S. power sector by 32% from 
achieve 50% clean power generation by 2025, which 
2005 levels. Under certain conditions, U.S. states can 
will require further cross-border transmission projects, 
help meet their emissions reductions targets through 
including for renewable energy. 
imported clean electricity from Canada. 
REDUCING CANADIAN NORTHERN, REMOTE AND INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES’ RELIANCE 
ON FOSSIL-FUEL GENERATED ENERGY
According to the Remote Communities Energy Database, there are 288 remote and off-grid 
communities in Canada, 190 of which rely on diesel fuel for their electricity needs, either completely or 
partially.39 Most of these communities also rely on diesel fuel for home heating.40 In addition to remote 
communities, a number of governmental and private buildings also rely on diesel fuel for electricity and 
heating. Sixty percent of Canada’s remote and off-grid communities are First Nations, Inuit, or Métis 
communities. In many cases the diesel must be flown in at great expense.
There are various environmental and human health concerns associated with the transportation, storage 
and combustion of diesel fuel. Further, high fuel costs associated with diesel generation and power 
plants already operating at capacity represent barriers to improving living conditions and facilitating 
economic development. The cost of producing off-grid electricity from diesel generators in Canada’s 
northern and remote communities can be up to 10 times higher than electricity generated on the main 
grid, and can significantly add to the cost of living for northern and remote communities.41 
Circumstances of specific communities will affect the costs and viability of options to increase the share 
of non-emitting electricity generation. While connecting small and distant communities to existing grid 
infrastructure is not economically feasible, in some cases, hybrid wind/solar-diesel generation systems 
could be deployed in communities to decrease reliance on diesel fuel. Other potential non-emitting 
energy alternatives to diesel generation include hydro, tidal, geothermal, small modular nuclear 
reactors, and biomass. Diesel is also used to provide home heating in northern and remote communities. 
There may be opportunities to further displace diesel with lower emitting technologies.
A number of renewable energy projects have already been deployed to displace diesel in northern and 
remote communities. In many circumstances, diesel infrastructure is reaching the end of its life providing 
an opportunity to shift to cleaner technologies. Although the upfront capital costs to building non-
emitting supply are high, these may be partially offset by lower operating/fuel costs. Long-term planning 
and investment is pertinent to the success of this transition. 
39   Natural Resources Canada, Remote Communities Database.
40   Carleton School of Public Policy and Administration, Report of 
the State of Alternative Energy in the Arctic.
41   Government of Canada, Status of Remote/Off-Grid 
38  National Energy Board, Electricity Exports and Imports Summary. Communities in Canada.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 29Moreover, non-emitting electricity infrastructure  provides substantial monetary savings for residential 
investments can help address issues of energy  consumers and businesses through lower electricity 
security for Indigenous communities and help set the  bills, as well as other benefits such as reduced 
conditions required for stable, and favorable policy  maintenance and improved durability. In addition, 
climates for establishing mini and micro grids for rural  several commercialisation opportunities exist; for 
and remote electrification, including those that are  example the International Energy Agency (IEA) 
First Nation community or family owned. estimates the global energy efficiency market at 
$221 billion in 2015. The IEA also notes that efficiency 
Currently, the electricity sector requires major  investments helped drive a global energy intensity 
investments in new infrastructure, as many facilities  improvement of 1.8% in 2015 however “the intensity 
are about to be retired or refurbished. The majority  improvement needs to immediately step up to 
of investments in the sector will be in electricity  2.6% per year from now until 2030 to get on a 2°C 
generation; however, transmission and distribution   pathway”.44 
will also see significant investments. There are 
estimated investment requirements of as much as   The IEA argues that energy efficiency is key to 
$350 billion in electricity infrastructure in Canada  reaching global emissions levels consistent with the 
between now and 2030.42 The Deep Decarbonisation  2°C temperature goals. They estimate that electricity 
Pathways Project estimates that $16 billion in  savings, through efficiency measures, could avoid 
additional annual investments will be necessary to  5,100 GW of new capacity by 2050. Likewise, Torrie 
achieve Canada’s low-carbon future, of which 87%  Smith Associates notes that low-carbon future 
($13.5B) will be required in the electricity sector.43 As  analysis typically include per capita levels of fuel 
conventional new sources of low-carbon electricity  and electricity use that are about half the current 
become less viable, or available (e.g., hydro), new  Canadian average, and energy productivity (GDP/
investments in emerging technologies will become  energy) four times higher than current Canadian 
increasingly targeted. levels.45 Energy efficiency trends are already positive 
in Canada as energy efficiency improved from 1990 
Given the long-term nature of electricity related  to 2013 by 24%.46 The National Energy Board projects 
infrastructure, planning and investment decisions 
that total end-use energy demand will increase at 
will need to be made in the near term to have the 
an average annual rate of 0.7% from 2014 to 2040, 
desired effect on the 2050 time horizon. For example, 
almost half the rate of increase from 1990 to 2013.
infrastructure spending, loan guarantees, and low-
interest loans could potentially help fund new hydro  Higher electricity efficiency can be achieved with 
projects and transmission lines to facilitate clean  targeted demand-side management measures and 
electricity projects. technological improvements.  Changes in behaviours 
such as consuming electricity during low-demand 
periods could reduce peak power demand which 
3 5  Energy conservation and energy 
could contribute to reduce GHG emissions from 
efficiency measures should increase 
load generation.47 Energy efficiency can also defer 
and be implemented alongside efforts 
transportation and distribution investments, reduce 
to reduce emissions from electricity 
line losses and avoid capacity reserve requirements. 
generation  Electricity savings should 
As technology develops, further electricity 
underlie decarbonisation pathways: 
productivity gains should be realised with devices like 
demand side management and reducing 
smart meters helping to reduce and optimise end-
equipment and transmission losses makes 
use. 
electrification far more  
effective and feasible 
Improvements in energy efficiency and demand 
side management are core elements of a long-
44  International Energy Agency, Energy Efficiency Market Report.
term low-GHG strategy and present economic 
45  Torrie, R., Acting on Climate Change: Extending the Dialogue 
opportunities. In many cases, energy efficiency is  Among Canadians; Some Reflections On Climate Change 
Response Policy. 
a cost-effective way to reduce GHG emissions as it 
46  Natural Resources Canada, Improving energy efficiency  
in Canada.
42  Conference Board of Canada, Canada’s Electricity  47  Energy efficiency can also defer transport and distribution (T&D) 
Infrastructure: Building a Case for Investment. investments, reduce line losses and avoid capacity reserve 
43  Bataille C., Pathways to Deep Decarbonization in Canada. requirements (IEA 2016)
30 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYModernizing the electricity grid could also contribute  significant between generation and end-use sources. 
to improved electricity efficiency by reducing losses  However, by 2050, it is highly probable that distributed 
when electricity is generated and transmitted. Grids  generation will play a bigger role, reducing the 
generally follow north-south orientations since most of  requirement for electricity to travel long distances from 
Canada’s population live in southern jurisdictions along  point of generation to end use. 
the international border with the United States, while the 
largest hydroelectric projects are located in scarcely 
inhabited areas to the north. Since the Canadian 
transmission networks extend over 160,000 km, losses are 
ENERGY STORAGE
The principal challenge with variable renewable energy such as wind or solar is that they are 
intermittent, meaning that power is not available when the wind is not blowing or the sun is not shining. 
As such, improvements in energy storage would make these intermittent sources much more attractive to 
grid operators, ensuring that power is available to meet demand cycles. Additionally, increase in energy 
density and charging rates for battery energy storage technologies can provide the improvements in 
the transport sector that will be required for a widespread adoption of electric means of transportation.
Incorporating intermittent power flows to existing grids requires added flexibility elsewhere on the grid, 
which can increase system costs. However, such costs could be offset by the adoption of technologies 
that can store excess power for weather conditions that are unfavorable to power generation and 
support the grid during peak demand time. Storage technologies could also allow households to rely on 
their own energy production, thus increasing the growth of local energy production, potential of smart 
grid systems, and energy availability for remote communities.
Figure 5 : Technology Roadmap : Energy Storage
Source: International Energy Agency, 2014. Technology Roadmap: Energy Storage
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 31The private sector has been a major leader in energy storage research. Specifically, battery storage 
technologies for cellphones, computers and electric vehicles, have seen tremendous growth in recent 
years. Already, the costs of lithium ion batteries are being significantly reduced by the production of 
electric transportation companies, such as Tesla Motors. Moreover, other cheaper and more efficient 
options are being developed, with possibilities for the entire energy sector. For example, sulfur-based 
and graphene-based battery technologies offer tremendous potential for cheaper and more powerful 
battery storage. Other energy storage options are available, with some of them already adopted by 
Canadian electricity providers. Recently, the Toronto Hydro Company’s compressed air energy storage 
pilot project was deployed in Lake Ontario and now provides 1 MW of storage capacity that can be sent 
to the city grid during peak demand times. Thermal energy storage is also being used in the community 
of Okotoks, Alberta. Nevertheless, the most promising option for some Canadian provinces is likely to 
be pumped storage hydropower (PSH). The technology is readily available, has low operation and 
maintenance costs, and is not limited by cycling degradation. 
Although recent improvements achieved by the private sector are encouraging, much more innovation 
is needed to allow for widespread renewable energy production by 2050. Consequently, due to the 
essential role of energy storage technologies in the electrification of numerous processes, including 
transportation, it is fundamental that energy storage technologies continue to improve over time. In 
order to accomplish this, governments and private actors have a shared responsibility to scale up 
investments throughout the innovation chain in order to allow breakthrough technologies as well as 
incremental improvements to be brought to market.
32 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY4  Energy Consumption in End Use Applications 
Under a low-carbon future, Canada’s electricity demand is expected to increase 
substantially by 2050, partly as a result of traditional pressures such as population 
and industrial growth, but also because of the electrification of end use applications 
that currently use other forms of energy. Many applications (e.g., cars, trucks, boilers, 
heaters) can use clean electricity to fulfil their power requirements, reducing emissions 
by switching away from refined petroleum products, natural gas, and other fossil fuels. 
This greater use of electric power is often accompanied by important efficiency gains, 
especially in the transportation sector, leading to an expected reduction in overall 
energy demand under low GHG scenarios. Maximising the abatement potential from 
electrification requires the simultaneous near decarbonisation of existing electricity 
generation and the large expansion of new zero or low emissions electricity sources, as 
discussed in the previous chapter.
All academic and expert analyses that pertain to low-GHG pathways show an increase 
in electricity supply and greater proportion of electricity in total energy demand. For 
example, the Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project shows electricity rising to 43% of 
total energy by 2050 compared to 25% currently, more than doubling the current supply 
between now and 2050. Moreover, the Trottier Energy Futures Project shows electricity 
generation more than tripling between now and 2050. 
Given Canada’s relatively cheap and clean electricity generating portfolio, implicit 
carbon costs for electric power are lower than in many other countries. This means 
that clean electricity is a comparative advantage for Canada. It will be important 
to examine any change or rise in electricity costs associated with the new demand 
requirements, and ensure that Canada continues to have access to affordable and 
reliable electricity going forward. 
Apart from electrification technologies, renewable and low carbon fuels are low or 
non-emitting options to fulfil many of Canada’s energy requirements. These fuels will be 
particularly important in areas where electrification is not currently possible or too costly, 
such as aviation and marine transport, some heavy freight transportation, and many 
industrial activities. Likewise, renewable or low carbon fuels can often be used in existing 
cars and trucks or building furnaces in higher blends, without affecting equipment 
performance, safety or warranties. 
Figure 6: Electricity aSsh aa shraere o off  NTaotiotnaall  eEnneregry gcyonsumption
All other fuel Electricity
DDPP 2050 57% 43%
Reference 2050 75% 25%
Source: Bataille, C. et al. Pathways to deep decarbonization in Canada.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 33It is important to recognize that all energy related  predicted to reach between 40 to 72% of total energy 
emissions reduction activities work best when paired  consumption, up from 16% in 2014.
with increasing energy efficiency. For example, 
Renewable fuels provide the last alternative in most 
increasing the number of homes heated by clean 
scenarios to decarbonise the intensive GHG sectors 
electricity will be much more viable when building 
of the economy. In key sectors, notably in heavy 
envelopes are designed to minimise heat loss. 
industry and freight transport, renewable fuels replace 
Importantly, a reduction in demand through energy 
conventional petroleum and natural gas usage. 
efficiency, conservation, and demand side savings  
Those alternative fuels are essential to attain deep 
will partially offset the increased Canadian  
GHG emissions reductions, since it is not likely that 
electricity requirements from the electrification of  
technological advances will allow electrification of all 
end use applications.
sectors of the economy by 2050.
Figure 7 presents several analyses of total energy 
Specifically, ECCC presents two scenarios where 
use in Canada by 2050 under low-GHG scenarios. 
electricity generates either 33% (High Demand 
The current energy use (2014) is presented, as well as 
Response) or 57% (High Non-Emitting) and renewable 
DDPP and Trottier Institute 2050 results. While there 
fuels supply either 45% (High Demand Response) or 
is population and economic growth during the 
6% (High Non-Emitting) of total energy consumption 
period, even stronger energy efficiency gains allow 
in Canada by 2050. ECCC’s High Non-Emitting 
for decreases in total energy consumption in most 
projection estimate refined petroleum products will still 
analyses. For example, total energy consumption 
account for around 20% of total energy consumption 
decreases from 10 950 PJ in 2014 to 7971 PJ on 2050 
by 2050, with natural gas generating 13%. ECCC’s High 
(ECCC GCAM scenario, labelled “High Non-Emitting”) 
Demand Response scenario projects a use of natural 
or even 7 251 PJ in 2050 (New Tech Trottier). The central 
gas falling to 21% of total energy consumption by 
role of energy efficiency gains in the projections 
2050, and no future use of refined petroleum products. 
is consistent with Chapter 2 that depicted energy 
In contrast, the DDPP estimates that electricity 
conservation as the “first fuel”, the foremost criteria to 
will generate 48% of total energy consumption in 
meet the 2050 GHG emissions reduction levels.
Canada by 2050, with 17% supplied by renewable 
Apart from a reduction in total energy consumption,  fuels, 17% by natural gas (with Carbon Capture 
the switch from fossil fuels use to electricity and  Storage Technologies [CCS]), 2% by coal (with CCS) 
renewable fuels alternatives is another cross cutting  and 13% by refined petroleum products. Trottier 
theme of all scenarios presented. Clean electricity  estimates electricity to take between 59-66% of total 
production across the country, achieved before  energy consumption in Canada, with renewable 
2050 in all scenarios, allows for deep GHG emission  fuels supplying either 9 and 17%, refined petroleum 
reductions from the electrification of end uses  products supplying between 14-16%, natural gas 6-7%, 
and industrial processes. Electricity use in 2050 is  coal 2-3% (retrofitted with CCS).
Figure 7: 2050 Projections of Total Energy Consumption by End Use Fuel
(PJ)
12000
10000
Natural Gas with CCS
Coal With CCS
8000 Others
Renewable Fuels
Electricity
6000
Refined Petroleum Products
Coal
Natural Gas
4000
2000
0
Historical 2014 High Non-Emitting High Demand Response High Ambition (DDPP) Current Tech (Trottier) New Tech (Trottier)
34 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY4 1  Transportation 4.1.1  Electrification of the transportation sector 
presents the potential for significant 
emission reductions; for personal 
vehicles, electric vehicle technology is 
KEY MESSAGES:
commercially available and continues to 
improve.
•  Electrification of the transportation sector 
presents the potential for significant  The transportation sector plays a vital role in the 
emission reductions; for personal vehicles,  lives of Canadians and in the Canadian economy. 
electric vehicle technology is commercially  Almost 82% of Canadians live in urban areas 
available and continues to improve. and 80% of commuters drive to work in their own 
vehicles. Canada’s transportation system moved 
•  Greater uptake and broad use of electric 
over $1 trillion worth of goods to international 
vehicles will require more widespread 
markets and employed 896,000 Canadians (5% 
acceptance of the technology supported 
of total employment) in 2014. Compared to other 
by information and understanding around: 
countries, Canada depends heavily on cars for 
cost of ownership and performance, 
urban mobility, and has a relatively high share of 
charging availability and times, and range 
large cars. Canada has large distances between its 
expectations. All of which are expected to 
cities, increasing intercity travel emissions. 
improved significantly over the  
coming years. Currently, the transportation sector is a major 
contributor to Canadian GHG emissions. Roughly 
•  Low-carbon and renewable fuels are 
one quarter (28%) of Canada’s GHG emissions 
consistent with low-GHG scenarios, 
come from the transportation sector, such as from 
particularly in areas that face challenges 
cars, buses, trucks, motorcycles and recreational 
with electrification. 
vehicles.48 About 57% of these emissions come 
from passenger transport, while heavier freight 
•  Freight transport is a challenging  
transport accounts for 37% of transport emissions.49  
sector, but there are a number of solutions 
However, given increasing efficiency improvements 
that show potential towards deeper 
in passenger vehicles (mainly driven by federal 
emissions reductions.
regulations) and challenges in achieving efficiency 
•  Emerging technologies such as energy  improvements in freight, the share (and net amount) 
storage or advanced lightweight  of GHG emissions from freight transportation is 
materials will increase energy efficiency  expected to increase into the future. 
and decrease emissions; innovative 
Road transportation activity can be broken down 
approaches to moving people and freight 
into two components: how people and freight 
are likely to become more widely adopted 
travel (mode choice) and how far they travel 
by mid-century. 
(activity level).50 Emissions reductions could result 
•  Modal shifts, such as moving passengers  from a greater market penetration of alternative 
and freight to less GHG intensive modes,  vehicle technologies and modal shifts (e.g., away 
could offer notable emissions reductions,  from single-occupancy vehicles). Activity level 
which would be further strengthened  changes could be achieved through consumption 
through clean technology deployment,  patterns shifting with technological advances (e.g., 
such as electrified passenger rail. teleworking) or urban densification. Canada will 
continue to encourage cities to improve public 
•  62% of Canada’s black carbon emissions  transit and bike lanes, and design urban spaces 
arise from the Transportation sector.  that reduce the need for vehicle transportation.  
In addition to being linked to climate 
warming, black carbon emissions are  Battery electric vehicles provide the opportunity 
also a public health concern. Canada  to emit zero GHG emissions when renewable or 
continues to take complementary action 
to reduce black carbon emissions.  48  Environment and Climate Change Canada, National Inventory 
Report 1990-2014: Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks in 
Canada.
49  Based on Canada’s Emission Trends Report 2014.
50  Conference Board of Canada, A Long, Hard Road:  
Reducing GHG Emissions in Canada’s Road Transportation 
Sector by 2050.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 35clean electricity is used. In addition, electric vehicles  In spite of Canada’s ambitious mitigation objectives 
reduce local air pollutant emissions.  Electric vehicle  and clean electricity portfolio, we lag behind many 
technology is well known, proven, and available  of our peer countries with respect to electric vehicle 
for purchase in Canada with increasing variation  penetration. For example, Norway reached annual 
and choice: in total, there are 22 different plug-in  sales of almost 40,000 fully electric vehicles in 2015, 
models on the road in Canada, made by 12 different  reaching a market share of 23% of passenger vehicles 
manufacturers.51  Alternatively, plug-in hybrid vehicles  sold. China has grown its electric vehicle fleet by 
offer increased driving range by switching to fossil  207,000 passenger vehicles in 2015, with an additional 
fuels when the electric battery charge diminishes.  123,700 electric buses and commercial trucks on the 
While these vehicles still use fuel, most of them are  road.53 Meanwhile, there are now more than 40,000 
used in a way that relies solely on electricity about  electric vehicle charging stations in Japan, including 
90% of the time. 52 in personal homes and commercial buildings. 
Charging stations are now more common than the 
roughly 35,000 gas stations in the country.54
4.1.2  Greater uptake and broad use of electric 
vehicles will require more widespread 
Although only about 24,000 plug-in vehicles have 
acceptance of the technology supported 
been sold in Canada thus far, sales increased by 
by information and understanding around: 
32% between 2014 and 2015, and are projected to 
cost of ownership and performance, 
continue to increase as prices converge with those of 
charging availability and times, and range 
conventional vehicles, charging infrastructure is built 
expectations. All of which are expected 
out, and more vehicle selection becomes available.55  
to improved significantly over the coming 
For example, out of the roughly 400,000 reservations 
years.
53   International Energy Agency, Energy Technology Perspectives 
2016.
54  Coulter, T., Japan Has More Car Chargers Than Gas Stations.
51   CAA, Electric Vehicles: What You Need to Know. 55  Fleet Carma, Electric Vehicle Sales in Canada: 2015 Final 
52   EVObsession, Best Electric Car for the Average American. Numbers.
Figure 8: 2050 Transportation Sector Energy Use Projections (PJ)
(PJ)
3000
2500
2000 Natural gas
Hydrogen
Refined petroleum products
1500
Renewable Fuels
Electricity
1000
500
0
Historical 2014 High Non- High Demand High Ambition Current Tech New Tech
Emitting Response (DDPP) (Trottier) (Trottier)
36 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYof the upcoming Tesla Model 3 electric vehicle, an  than natural gas. Biogas, generated from biomass 
estimated 36,000 have been made in Canada.56   from landfill sites, agriculture, wastewater, or other 
sources is upgraded to natural gas quality. It can 
While the production costs of electric vehicles  then be directed to the grid for use in buildings 
remain higher than traditional gasoline vehicles, a  or transportation applications in the form of 
more significant challenge limiting electric vehicle  compressed natural gas (CNG) or liquefied  
adoption is consumer concerns regarding the  natural gas (LNG). 
range of the battery charge. Charging speeds and 
battery range currently do not allow for comparable  Natural gas vehicles are used in several fleets 
refueling times when benchmarked against  around the world. Up to a 25% reduction in carbon 
traditional gasoline vehicles. In some circumstances,  dioxide equivalent emissions can be achieved 
cold weather can also reduce electric vehicle  on a well-to-wheel basis when replacing gasoline 
driving range. However, studies have found that the  with compressed natural gas in light-duty vehicles.  
current battery range for electric vehicles is sufficient  Natural gas can be an effective solution for 
to satisfy close to 90% of personal vehicle use. For  transportation that is harder to electrify such as 
example, a study from the Massachusetts Institute of  on-road freight, marine shipping and rail, featuring 
Technology used GPS data to estimate the energy  relatively quick refueling times and long ranges. 
requirements of personal vehicles across the United  As such, it has been a key area for research and 
States, determining that 87% of requirements could  development for these modes. Natural gas also has 
be met with current electric vehicles.57   the advantage of significantly improving air quality 
and reducing noise when compared to diesel. 
In addition, there are significant efforts put in place 
to increase fast charging infrastructure in some  Hydrogen fuel cell technology can also help 
Canadian jurisdictions, which can allow the average  decarbonise the transportation sector. The process 
electric car to charge 80% of its battery capacity  of producing electricity with a fuel cell involves 
in 30 minutes. Although needs for infrastructure  hydrogen and oxygen as inputs, and produces water 
investments will be important in the coming years, it  vapor and heat at the tailpipe, therefore emitting 
is important to note that chargers will not need to be  no GHG emissions. However, hydrogen production 
as abundant as fuel dispensers are today, as more  currently either requires significant amounts of 
than 95% of charging is done at home, and public  electricity to be produced through electrolysis, or 
charging stations generally only need to be used  can be produced with methane reforming, which is 
when motorists travel long distances. an emitting process. 
Hydrogen fuel cell vehicles provide the benefit of 
4.1.3  Low-carbon and renewable fuels are 
having similar refueling times when compared with 
consistent with low-GHG scenarios, 
internal combustion engine vehicles, but they also 
particularly in areas that face challenges 
face important barriers such as the cost of fuel cells, 
with electrification. 
cost and energy intensity of hydrogen production, 
and the need for new infrastructure for hydrogen 
Low-carbon, renewable fuels, and hydrogen are 
refueling stations. Nonetheless, hydrogen is a key 
of particular importance for areas that are hard to 
component of several modelling exercises including 
electrify. A number of renewable fuels are already 
the IEA and Deep Decarbonization Pathways 
commercially available such as ethanol, biodiesel 
Project. For example, the IEA has modelled different 
or biofuels. Fuel blends contain varying renewable 
levels of Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle adoption. So far, 
content, and environmental benefits expand when 
Toyota and Hyundai have commercialised fuel cell 
second-generation biofuels are used. Unlike other 
electric vehicles in Europe, South Korea, California, 
modes of transportation, the aviation industry has 
Vancouver and Japan and further investments could 
few options available for reducing GHG emissions. 
help to accelerate infrastructure deployment. For 
Improved technological and operational measures 
example, there are already several hydrogen stations 
will have their role, but only low-carbon alternative 
and buses in Whistler, British Columbia. Hydrogen is 
fuels (biojet) have the potential to offer significant 
used widely in industry for ammonia production and 
life-cycle GHG emission reductions.
refining, and can be used for storing the energy in 
Renewable natural gas offers the potential to  excess renewable electricity. Canada is well placed 
achieve considerably greater emissions reductions  in the development of hydrogen and alternative fuels 
with companies such as Westport innovations and 
56  Model 3 Tracker, Known Sport of Model 3 Vehicles by Status.  Ballard, developing and exporting these low carbon 
57  Needell, Z., Potential for Widespread Electrification of Personal 
Vehicle for Travel in the United States. technologies.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 37Modelling results from very low greenhouse gas  the transportation requirements in 2050. Electricity 
scenarios for 2050 point to various avenues to power  powers 18-21% and hydrogen powers 3-32%. Refined 
Canada’s transportation sector (see description of  petroleum products continue to power 36-43% of the 
models and scenarios in Modelling and Scenario Box  sectors energy requirements. 
in Chapter 2). Currently, refined petroleum products 
(e.g., gasoline, diesel) power over 90% of Canada’s 
4.1.4  Freight transport is a challenging sector, 
transportation energy requirements. Under scenarios 
but there are a number of solutions that 
where aggregate Canadian emissions decline 
show potential towards deeper emissions 
dramatically in 2050, the energy portfolio of the 
reductions. 
transportation sector shifts considerably (see Figure 8).
Freight transportation, such as heavy duty on road 
Under ECCC’s first High Non-Emitting scenario, 
vehicles, aviation and marine is a challenging area 
electricity powers 41% of transportation energy 
for GHG mitigation. Improving the fuel efficiency 
requirements in 2050, whereas renewable low-carbon 
of freight transportation is essential to reducing 
fuels account for 8%. The remaining requirements 
greenhouse gas emissions from this subsector. 
are met with hydrogen (16%) and natural gas (1%), 
Moreover, alternatives to conventional internal 
although refined petroleum products continue to 
combustion engines exist including vehicles that run 
power 33% of the vehicle fleets including air and 
on fuels such as biofuel blends, liquefied petroleum 
marine transportation. In comparison, ECCC’s High 
gases, or natural gas. The use of these fuels can 
Demand Response model points to renewable and 
reduce the GHG intensity of road transportation, 
low-carbon fuels dominating the transportation 
sometimes significantly. 
energy portfolio (78%). In this modelling scenario, 
electric vehicles do not penetrate the market.  Electrification of freight transport is currently limited 
due to technological constraints such as insufficient 
The Deep Decarbonization Pathway Project also 
range for long-haul shipping, long charging times 
points to a high penetration of renewable and 
for delivery requirements, as well as the significant 
low-carbon fuel powered vehicles (55%). Electricity 
energy requirements and engine sizes required to 
makes up 26% of the power requirements from the 
transport heavy loads. However, some companies 
transportation sector, whereas hydrogen accounts 
have revealed plans to develop electric freight 
for 14%. Under the Trottier analyses scenarios, 
transport in the coming years. For example, last July 
renewable or alternative fuels power 10-18% of 
CANADIAN BUSINESSES ADOPTING LIGHT FREIGHT ELECTRIFICATION
A number of Canadian companies, and companies operating in Canada, have opted to green their 
fleet through the use of hybrid-electric vehicles or fully electric vehicles. For couriers and other shipping 
companies, fleet management and fuel use has a major impact on operating costs, and is constantly 
being reviewed to minimise costs and increase performance. Some companies have opted for electric 
vehicle technology for both economic and environmental benefits.
As a few examples, Canada Post, Purolator, the United Postal Service, Fedex, and Novex have moved 
towards more sustainable transportation solutions for shipping. Other initiatives, such as a fully electrified 
taxi company, have been developed, for example in Montréal by Téo Taxi. Although information gaps 
appear to be an important barrier to adoption of electric vehicles by small and medium enterprises, 
several companies are providing support services to demonstrate the business case for greening vehicle 
fleets. This involves procedures such as calculating expenditure impacts, renting out vehicles to allow for 
trials, and providing technical support for charging infrastructure management.
Another company, Communauto, North America’s oldest and largest car-sharing company, has recently 
announced its purchase of 600 hybrid-electric or fully electric vehicles. Among these vehicles, 515 are 
destined to the Québec market, while the remainder will be distributed to Communauto’s European 
market. Ride-sharing services also displace a significant amount of personal vehicle requirements, 
thereby reducing GHG emissions further. 
38 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYMercedes-Benz unveiled its latest electric prototype,  and GHG performance through new technologies, 
the Urban eTruck, conceived for dense urban areas.  designs and system efficiencies, and are exploring 
The fully electric vehicle has two electric motors, can  a shift to low-carbon fuels. For marine shipping, 
hold 3 batteries, and will be able to support up to 26  mandatory technical and operational emissions 
tons. Conceived for short distances (200 kilometers)  reduction measures established by the International 
and use in heavy traffic, Mercedes-Benz expects to  Maritime Organization (IMO) are also driving 
commercialise the vehicle by 2020.58 efficiency improvements.  However, significant 
emissions reductions will take time as the existing 
Despite continuous progress, there are some  stock of ships and locomotives turn over.  Electric 
challenges associated with reducing emissions from  and alternative fuel solutions can also achieve 
freight transportation. Finding economical means  meaningful reductions from port and cargo handling 
of producing biofuels and alternative means of  equipment at transportation hubs.
transporting merchandise will be key.
Figure 9: An Urban eTruck59 4.1.5  Emerging technologies such as energy 
storage or advanced lightweight 
materials will increase energy efficiency 
and decrease emissions; innovative 
approaches to moving people and 
freight are likely to become more widely 
adopted by mid-century.
Looking forward, improvements in energy storage 
technology will facilitate the adoption of electric 
vehicles. The most anticipated technological 
development related to battery storage is the use 
of graphene in batteries, which would allow for a 
significantly higher energy density (battery capacity 
per unit of weight), significantly faster recharging 
times, and lower costs. Graphene is abundantly 
A large deployment of heavy electric trucks may  available and the emergence of graphene batteries 
take longer than cars since the turnover rate of  could be a tipping point where electric vehicles 
heavy trucks is significantly lower than for cars (30  will become more affordable and convenient, 
years for trucks compared to 20 years for cars).  broadening adoption. 
Emissions from aviation, marine, and rail transport are 
also challenging to reduce due to the high energy  Connected and automated vehicles, combined 
density of fuel required with these modes. Despite  with smart infrastructure, are expected to be 
these challenges, the energy intensity of the freight  increasingly deployed by automakers, and have the 
transportation sector decreased from 1.38 MJ/Tkm in  potential to not only make driving more convenient, 
2011 to 1.30 MJ/Tkm in 2013. A recent report from the  but considerably safer, and more efficient, which 
Conference Board of Canada suggests that much  can lead to improved environmental outcomes. 
greater performance and efficiency improvements  While not as significant as the impact of electrifying 
will be needed to help bring Canada to deep  transportation, efficiency improvements from 
decarbonisation in the transportation sector.60   autonomous driving could be important. With 
quicker reaction times than humans, connected and 
In 2013, new federal regulations imposing GHG  autonomous vehicles can circulate with less distance 
emission standards for new on-road heavy-duty  between cars, allowing for much more efficient 
vehicles and engines were implemented to align  traffic movement (e.g., reduced idling, smoother 
with U.S. national standards and move the Canadian  acceleration), and perfectly safe slipstreaming (i.e., 
heavy truck fleet toward more fuel efficient vehicles.  cars avoiding wind resistance by following others 
In the marine and rail sectors, where fuel represents  closely), resulting in less energy wasted. The expected 
a significant share of overall costs, operators are  safety improvements and reduced congestion could 
actively seeking improvements in fuel efficiency  add up to large fuel savings, with significant co-
benefits for the economy and the environment.  
58   Mercedes-Benz, Electric Truck for the City.
59   Mercedes-Benz, Urban eTruck. Finally, advanced lightweight materials and 
60   Conference Board of Canada, A Long Hard Road: Drastically 
Reducing GHG Emissions in Canada’s Road Transportation Sector  manufacturing methods will need to be integrated 
by 2050.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 39ELECTRIFIED PUBLIC TRANSPORT AND SMART URBAN PLANNING
In the transition to a low-carbon economy, public transportation provides significant GHG emission 
reductions as compared with personal vehicles, but diesel buses still emit a sizeable amount. More 
recently, advances in the development of batteries for electric vehicles have spilled over to city buses. 
For example, the city of Gothenburg has been using three electric buses on one line of its public 
transport service, and has been using seven hybrid electric buses. Although the buses are significantly 
more expensive than diesel buses upon purchase, the fuel savings rapidly compensate this difference. 
The buses are charged for six minutes between trips, allowing for more than enough range for the route 
they serve, while providing outlets to charge phones and providing Wi-Fi to users inside the buses.61 
Similar projects are under way in Montreal, starting with hybrid-electric buses.62  
Another important consideration in transitioning to a low carbon economy is how to plan and design 
cities in order to support low-emission technologies and lifestyles, and correct for the traffic congestion 
levels that are seen in large Canadian cities. Congestion is an important cost to the economy, evaluated 
in 2008 as costing the regional economy of the Greater Toronto and Hamilton Area, directly and 
indirectly, $6 billion annually.63 This kind of structural change will take time to realise, but governments 
can start building momentum in the short-term by deciding to take a holistic approach to development 
through integrating land use, transportation, energy production and community planning. 
More and more, cities are looking into innovative solutions to reduce congestion on their roadways. For 
example, the city of Edmonton is one of two Canadian cities taking part in a North American program 
aimed at developing Connected Vehicle Technology.64  
This technology can improve many elements of transportation in cities, by preventing collisions between 
cars, by guiding drivers through detours when there is a slowdown or an accident on the road, and even 
adjusting traffic lights along the detour routes to minimise congestion. Other technological advances 
are leading to autonomous vehicles and greater use of vehicle sharing, which stand to have important 
impacts of the future movement of people within cities.  Technological advances also help pave the 
way for new management approach by cities and governments, such as the use of efficient pricing 
of tolling mechanisms. For example, High Occupancy Tolls Lanes allow for both vehicles with enough 
passengers and permit holders to drive in these lanes, allowing for reduced congestion and revenues 
that can be invested into public transit. 
across all modes of transportation to increase  4.1.6  Modal shifts, such as moving passengers 
efficiency, from on-road electric vehicles to aviation.  and freight to less GHG intensive modes, 
Other considerations to reduce transportation  could offer notable emissions reductions, 
emissions include: retrofit of heavy-duty vehicles  which would be further strengthened 
including tractors with GHG-reducing technologies  through clean technology deployment, 
(aerodynamics, auxiliary power units) and the  such as electrified passenger rail.
scrappage of less efficient vehicles.
Given the emissions profile and current limitations 
in electrifying freight transportation, a shift towards 
rail transit for a majority of freight could reduce the 
amount of energy needed to move goods around 
the country. Although rail transportation entails issues 
such as longer shipping times, and less flexibility 
in terms of routing of goods, it has the potential to 
61  Electricity, The electric bus – quiet, exhaust emission-free and 
reduce emissions per unit of goods moved by about 
passenger-friendly.
62  Canadian Press, Electric bus pilot project to hit Montreal   75% compared with on-road vehicles for the same 
streets in 2015.  distance travelled.65 As for passenger transportation, 
63  Urban Transportation Task Force, The High Cost of Congestion in 
Canadian Cities. 
64  City of Edmonton, On the Front Edge of Smart Vehicle  65  Association of American Railroads, Freight Railroads Help Reduce 
Technology.  Greenhouse Gas Emissions. 
40 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYrail offers another potential avenue for intercity travel,  In addition to being linked to climate warming, black 
which could reduce emissions compared to personal  carbon emissions are also a public health concern. 
vehicles or bus transportation. Other benefits to shifts  As a component of PM , black carbon particles 
2.5
toward rail transportation include reduced wear and  are small enough to be inhaled and absorbed into 
tear on roads and reduced road congestion. the lungs and bloodstream. Reductions in black 
carbon emissions from the transportation sector have 
In addition to being less GHG-intensive than on-
important co-benefits for the health of Canadians.
road modes of transportation, there may be an 
opportunity to reduce emissions even further through 
4 2  Buildings
electrification of Canada’s passenger rail systems 
moving on dedicated tracks. Heavily populated 
corridors, such as the Windsor-Quebec axis, represent 
prime areas for such a system. Although this type 
KEY MESSAGES:
of project requires significant capital expenditures, 
important savings can be realised through reduced  •  Over one third of Canadian homes 
energy costs, increased performance allowing better  are already heated and cooled 
optimisation (e.g., allowing more units to be attached  with clean electricity; emerging 
to the same locomotive), and reduced maintenance  technologies will make this option 
costs.66 Electrification of trains also provides other  increasingly economically attractive.
benefits in the form of smoother rides, reduced 
power load at higher altitudes compared with diesel,  •  Natural gas continues to play an 
and service to underground locations (which is not  important role in heating and power 
possible for diesel given emissions of pollutants).  requirements. Renewable Natural Gas 
is a small but growing part of  
Electric light-rail trains represent an interesting mode  the supply mix meeting those  
of transportation for public transit, as it is up to 10  energy needs. 
times cheaper than underground metro systems for 
the same distance covered.67 At this cheaper cost  •  The electrification of the  
per kilometer, light-rail trains become particularly  building sector should be  
appealing for bringing commuters from suburban  matched with a scale-up of  
areas into cities faster, while reducing the amount of  energy efficiency measures. 
vehicles in downtown areas. Light-rail trains are also 
•  District heating for residential and 
easier to electrify than buses, which makes it a less 
commercial buildings could help 
GHG-intensive transit option than buses, while also 
lower GHG emissions since heat is 
reducing the cost of electrification.
generated in a centralised location 
with non-emitting fuel options. 
4.1.7  62% of Canada’s black carbon emissions 
arise from the Transportation sector.  •  Life cycle assessment quantifies 
In addition to being linked to climate  holistic environmental impacts of 
warming, black carbon emissions are  buildings, enabling optimal decisions 
also a public health concern. Canada  in sustainable design.
continues to take complementary action 
•  Retrofitting existing buildings will be 
to reduce black carbon emissions. 
necessary to address the inefficient 
The transportation sector emits significant amounts  building stock that could otherwise 
of black carbon mostly through diesel engines and  stand well beyond mid-century.
vehicles. Canada continues to take regulatory 
action to address air pollutant emissions from  •  Smarter, more sustainable cities are 
transportation, which also reduces black carbon,  key to a prosperous future.
including regulations for on- and off-road diesel 
vehicles and engines manufactured or imported for 
sale in Canada. Regulations to implement the North 
American Emissions Control Area to reduce emissions 
from shipping also reduce black carbon emissions.
66  Professional Engineers Ontario, Towards a clean train policy: 
diesel versus electric.
67  Condon P., Don’t Waste Billions on Bad Transit Projects.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 41Figure 10: 2050 Building Sector Energy Use Projections
(PJ)
3500
3000
2500
Others
2000 Renewable Fuels
Coal
1500 Electricity
Refined Petroleum Products
1000
Natural Gas
500
0
Historical 2014 High Non-Emitting High Demand High Ambition Current Tech New Tech (Trottier)
Response (DDPP) (Trottier)
4.2.1  Over one third of Canadian homes  Newfoundland and Labrador (56%) and  
are already heated and cooled with  New Brunswick (48%). 68
clean electricity; emerging technologies 
will make this option increasingly  Current technologies that may become more cost 
economically attractive. effective in the future include electrically driven 
geothermal and air source heat pumps, and 
Emissions from the buildings sector arise from  increased use of ambient solar heating. Air-source 
residential, commercial, and institutional buildings, as  heat pumps can draw heat from the air and transfer 
well as the equipment in them. The building sector is  warm air inside during the winter or outside during 
currently one of the most GHG-intensive in Canada  the summer.69 Ground-source heat pumps, also 
and is the third largest emitting sector representing  called earth-energy systems, can use energy from 
12% of Canada’s emissions - with emissions currently  the ground to produce heating and cooling and are 
projected to grow through 2030. However, a number  being increasingly used across Canada. Due to their 
of measures can help to achieve reductions in the  high efficiency, ground-source heat pumps can yield 
sector including fuel-switching and energy efficiency. energy savings of up to 40% higher than an air-source 
pump but require higher up-front installation costs.
Some Canadian homes and commercial buildings 
already rely on clean electricity to power their  Solar energy for homes also offers many advantages 
heating, cooling, lighting and appliances. Current  and helps lower grid-related energy requirements. 
technology such as electric boilers, electric  New technologies are emerging to better generate 
baseboards, space heaters, and heat pumps  photovoltaic energy for homes such as: solar 
can be used instead of fossil fuels, resulting in zero  roadways, solar shingles, solar panels installed on 
greenhouse gas emissions when combined with  the sides of buildings, and thin solar films that can be 
a non-emitting electricity portfolio. In 2011, 39%  applied to any metal roofing. 
of Canadians households used electricity for their 
heating equipment. Electricity was the predominant 
energy sources for heating in Quebec (66%), 
68  Statistics Canada, Households and the Environment:  
Energy Use (11-526-S)
69  Natural Resources Canada, Coming to Terms with Heat Pumps
42 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYFigure 10 illustrates the current use of energy in the  4.2.3  The electrification of the building sector 
building sector as comprising of natural gas (45%),  should be matched with a scale-up of 
electricity (36%), renewable fuels (10%) and refined  energy efficiency measures. 
petroleum products (6%). Modelling projections for 
Increasing energy efficiency is particularly important 
a low GHG economy in 2050 take into account a 
in the Canadian building sector, as Canadian 
variety of factors such as potential provincial energy 
households consume an average of 11,000 KWh of 
codes amendments, regulations on new buildings 
electricity per year (2010). By comparison, this is just 
requirements and technological costs. Note that 
under the U.S. average (12,960 KWh), and well above 
the projections do not take into account a potential 
Australia (7,350 KWh) and EU countries’ average such 
increase in the use of clean district heating systems  
as France (5,760 KWh), the United Kingdom (4,510 
in Canada.
KWh) or Germany (3,515 KWh).70 This is generally 
In all of the low-GHG analyses, the share of energy  attributable to Canada’s cold climate and relatively 
met through clean electricity increases from today’s  large sizing in residential housing. 
levels. The first ECCC low-GHG analyses (High Non-
Energy efficiency improvements can be realised 
Emitting) illustrates electricity at 70% of the energy 
either through the design of a building’s system, 
use of the building sector by 2050, while the second 
including air sealing, better construction materials, 
projection (High Demand Response) estimates 
passive heating, insulation, white roofs, triple pane 
electricity to be 50% of energy use in the sector 
windows; or more energy efficient equipment and 
(renewable fuels represent 22%). 
appliances including heat pumps, condensing 
The DDPP scenario demonstrates that electricity  boilers, high efficiency cooling, energy-efficient 
increases to fulfill 99% of the building sector’s energy  lighting and appliances, and energy management 
requirements in 2050 (with 1% remaining for natural  control systems. Development of highly efficient 
gas). The Trottier Institute, demonstrates two scenarios  heating and cooling technologies, such as energy 
where the share of electricity increases to 86-89%  management systems and smart thermostats, can 
of total energy use in the sector by 2050, where the  reduce costs and improve performance of heating, 
remaining requirement is fulfilled through natural gas  ventilation, and air conditioning.
(4-5%), renewable fuels (4-5%) and refined petroleum 
In Canada, provincial and municipal building energy 
products (2-5%). 
codes and federal energy-efficiency standards 
are important tools for driving energy productivity 
4.2.2  Natural gas continues to play an  improvements. Future policies will need to ensure that 
important role in heating and power  energy efficiency programs and energy supply fuel-
requirements. Renewable Natural Gas is  switching both correspond to low-GHG objectives. 
a small but growing part of the supply mix 
meeting those energy needs. Energy efficiency in the buildings sector has 
numerous co-benefits such as infrastructure resilience 
Across most scenarios, natural gas, a relatively lower 
and lower operating and maintenance costs, as 
emitting fossil fuel, continues to power some heating 
well as positive effects on national income and 
and other requirements in the building sector. 
employment. Moreover, several studies have pointed 
Natural gas can also be substituted for Renewable 
to increased health benefits from better designed 
Natural Gas where desirable, without replacing 
buildings in terms of lower risks of respiratory and 
capital or infrastructure, such as natural gas home 
cardiovascular conditions, rheumatism, arthritis or 
furnaces. Generally, Renewable Natural Gas is fully 
allergies. Lastly, energy efficiency savings can be 
interchangeable with conventional natural gas.
beneficial for lower income Canadians. 
Methane that is released from sources such as 
landfills, agricultural residues, livestock production,  4.2.4  District heating for residential and 
sewage treatment plants, and forestry waste can be  commercial buildings could help lower 
recovered, cleaned, and can be directly substituted  GHG emissions since heat is generated in 
for conventional natural gas.  a centralised location with non-emitting 
fuel options. 
District heating (also known as heat networks 
or teleheating) is a system for distributing heat 
70  World Energy Council Indicators, Average electricity 
consumption per electrified household,
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 43generated in a centralised location for residential  would double in Canada in approximately 50 years 
and commercial heating requirements such as   from today, well past mid-century. New construction 
space heating and water heating. These systems  has been addressed in the previous sections, but the 
have the potential to help reduce GHG emissions,   dominating remaining building stock could mostly 
by utilising low-carbon fuel options such as waste  remain standing in 2050. According to the IEA, close 
heat or biofuel. to 75% of the OECD countries building stock from 2010 
will still be standing in 2050.
District heating is the dominant heating system 
in Nordic countries (except for Norway). In those  Therefore, new building energy code regulations on 
countries, biomass, natural gas, and municipal solid  their own will not be enough to achieve significant 
waste biogas are commonly used as energy sources  GHG emissions reductions from by 2050 and 
for district heating. Specifically, biomass is used as  additional efforts will be needed to address existing 
fuel for 60% of district heating system in the Swedish  buildings. The same is true in the industrial and 
building sector, 40% in Denmark, and 70% in Finland.   commercial building subsectors.
Canada has similar geographical and climatic 
conditions and has thus a vast and untapped  Making existing buildings more energy-efficient 
potential for extensive district heating systems.71  through retrofitting is an important step towards 
reducing GHG emissions reductions in Canada. 
Retrofitting requires investments, especially in the 
4.2.5  Life cycle assessment quantifies holistic 
case of deep retrofits where significant parts of the 
environmental impacts of buildings, 
building must be refurbished. Different retrofit rates 
enabling optimal decisions in  
are found around the world depending on type 
sustainable design.
of buildings, climate and costs. For example, EU 
member countries have an energy savings retrofit 
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is a scientific method 
target rate of 3%/year for government owned 
for measuring the environmental footprint of 
buildings.74 Similarly, Germany has a target of thermal 
materials, products and services over their entire 
retrofitting 2% of total residential buildings per year.75 
lifetime. Applied to a building, LCA measures 
environmental impacts like energy consumption 
Energy management practices, including energy 
and greenhouse gas emissions at every stage of a 
benchmarking, audits, and on-going building 
building’s life. It includes raw resource extraction, 
optimisation can help generate better understanding 
product manufacturing and transportation, building 
of buildings energy usage and costs, identify areas 
construction, operation and repair, and demolition.
of opportunities, and make improvements where 
and when necessary. They can also provide green 
LCA helps building designers consider the total 
solutions for systems that are embedded in the 
environmental impact of material choices and other 
building and may be harder or more costly  
design decisions. Designers use LCA to examine 
to replace.76  
trade-offs and alternatives, for the lowest possible 
lifetime environmental footprint of the building. This 
data-driven process allows building designers to test  4.2.7  Smarter, more sustainable cities are key to 
and validate their sustainability decisions.72   a prosperous future
Urban planning and design will be key to making 
4.2.6  Retrofitting existing buildings will be 
building sites and designs work together to enable 
necessary to address the inefficient 
lower GHG solutions. In a low-GHG economy, for 
building stock that could otherwise stand 
example, communities should be making effective 
well beyond mid-century.
use of local energy sources ranging from on-site 
renewable energy to waste heat and organic waste, 
According to the Canadian Housing and Mortgage 
allowing optimal use of clean energy grids. District 
Corporation, Canadian residential construction has 
energy networks will distribute thermal energy for 
grown at an average rate of 1.5% in the past five 
years.73 At this rate, the built residential environment  74  Official Journal of the European Union, Directive 2012/27/EU of 
the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 
on Energy Efficiency Amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 
71  International Energy Association, Canada Review 2015. 2010/30/EU and Repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC.
72  O’Connor, J., and Bowick, M., Advancing Sustainable Design  75  Germany Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology, 
with Life Cycle Assessment. Germany’s New Energy Policy Heading Towards 2050 with 
73  Statistics Canada, 2011 Census of Canada. Canadian Mortgage  Secure, Affordable and Environmentally Sound Energy.
and Housing Corporation, Total Housing Starts, Canada,  76  Natural Resources Canada. Commissioning Guide for  
Provinces and Metropolitan Areas, 1990–2015 (units). New Buildings.
44 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYLOW EMISSIONS OPERATIONS AND GOVERNMENT PROCUREMENT 
Governments have an important leadership role to play in the transition to a low-carbon economy 
given the size of their operations. By implementing ambitious policies, federal, provincial and territorial 
governments can lead by example on many aspects of the low-carbon transition. Canada’s Federal 
Sustainable Development Strategy has developed objectives for greening government operations.77 The 
federal government has adopted a target to reduce emissions by 40% from 2005 levels by 2030, with the 
aspiration to achieve it earlier, potentially by 2025. Furthermore, the government has committed for all 
operations run by Public Services and Procurement Canada to use 100% of their electricity purchased 
from clean power, and to significantly increase the energy efficiency of federal buildings, with the goal 
of cutting emissions almost in half. Several provinces, such as British Columbia, Quebec, and Ontario, 
have also adopted targets to reduce emissions or to achieve carbon neutral operations. 
Governments can lead the way in many areas, such as green procurement, green buildings, energy 
efficiency measures, and other green investments. New government buildings could require a certain 
type of environmental certification, as green buildings are generally recognised to have a positive effect 
on the asset value.78 For older buildings, the use of deep retrofits would help to substantially reduce 
energy costs and GHG emissions. The use of energy performance measurement could help to better 
understand and improve energy use. Governments could also encourage the use of public and active 
transportation as well as flexible working arrangements such as telework. 
Green procurement is one way in which the government can reduce its environmental footprint and 
increase domestic demand for clean technologies and other environmentally preferable goods 
and services. For example, the federal government’s Policy on Green Procurement targets specific 
environmental outcomes where procurement can effectively be used to mitigate the impact of 
environmental issues, such as climate change. Allowing climate considerations to be streamlined 
into the procurement process, such as the disclosure of climate performance, could more accurately 
benchmark and compare different product and services.  The purchasing power of governments could 
also be used to support the development of green technologies.  Governments could also help to 
accelerate the adoption of certain green products such as electric vehicles with charging stations at 
work locations. 
In some sectors, there are opportunities to take a more important role in greening their operations. 
The defense sector is increasingly recognising the strategic importance of having alternative sources 
of power and the potential cost savings. The Pentagon has become the second largest purchaser of 
long-term renewable electricity contracts in the U.S., according to Bloomberg data.79 Low-carbon 
opportunities exist for Department of National Defense and other government departments that have 
large fleets.
It is important that governments explore best practices on greening government operations by learning 
from other jurisdictions. This is important for developing knowledge and raising ambition over time in 
order to be innovative and creative in finding solutions.
heating and cooling, while smart electrical grids  waste heat, use renewable fuels, and capitalise on 
manage local energy supply and demand. Energy  opportunities as energy producers.777879
storage systems could help to balance variations in 
supply and demand for heating, cooling and power 
while local industrial, commercial, and agricultural 
enterprises approach energy in an integrated  77  Government of Canada, Shrinking the Environmental Footprint – 
way. Finally, businesses could take advantage of  Beginning With Government.
78  The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors, Green Value.
79  Financial Post, How the Pentagon is Waging America’s Wars 
Using Renewable Energy.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 45AN ELECTRIFICATION SUCCESS STORY 
Mining vehicles typically require energy-dense fuels 
to move and lift heavy loads. However, in 2008, SBC 
Case Industries, PapaBravo’s parent company, initiated 
an R&D project to develop electric vehicles for use in 
potash mines. Later, PapaBravo developed a business 
plan based on R&D technology with the support of 
the National Research Council’s Industrial Research 
Assistance Program. The company was able to develop 
many vehicles such as the Marmot-EV and a second-
generation truck able to function in environments 
other than potash mines. The vehicles have a range of 
about 120 kilometres and can recharge in less than an hour. The Saskatoon firm PM&P which acquired 
PapaBravo in 2015 is now a global competitor in electric mining vehicles and is doing business in 
Canada, South Africa, Australia, and New Zealand.80 
4 3  Industry  4.3.1  National circumstances challenge  
the decarbonisation of Canadian 
industrial sectors
KEY MESSAGES: Historically, Canada has benefited from an 
internationally competitive economy based on low-
•  National circumstances represent  cost natural resources and accompanying industrial 
challenges for the decarbonisation of  activities. These activities face significant challenges 
Canadian industrial sectors. to decarbonisation:
•  Electrification of industrial operations  •  Canada’s energy sector is an important driver 
offers emissions reduction potential. of the Canadian economy. Canada’s exports 
of energy, extracted resources, and agricultural 
•  Cogeneration reduces waste heat and 
commodities are significant contributors to the 
generates thermal and electric energy, 
gross domestic product. Also, Canada is a net 
thereby producing environmental and 
energy exporter. It is the world’s fourth largest 
economic benefits.
exporter of crude oil and fifth largest exporter of 
natural gas.
•  Other improvements in energy 
efficiency through innovative ways 
•  Canada’s oil and gas sector is GHG intensive due 
of optimising energy production and 
to the energy required in the primary extraction 
consumption will be essential. 
of fossil fuel and other natural resources. 
•  Carbon capture and storage,  
•  Industries are concentrated in particular 
fuel switching to non-emitting fuels,  
areas of the country, making distributional 
and recycling can also reduce 
impacts of abatement policies a particular 
emissions. These technologies continue 
concern. Regional cooperation and progressive 
to improve.
mitigation policies will be key to ensure that 
decarbonisation efforts do not disproportionally 
•  Nevertheless, there remain challenges 
affect certain regions.
in reducing emissions from some sectors, 
for which innovation and research and 
•  Over 75% of Canada’s total industrial energy 
development will be necessary.
use is consumed in the mining, pulp and paper, 
iron and steel, cement, smelting and refining, 
80   National Research Council Canada, Revolutionizing Canada’s 
Mining Industry with Electric Vehicles.
46 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYchemicals, and petroleum refining sectors. The  electric resistance elements to produce steam and 
greatest portion of energy (about 70%) is used  heat, and the conversion of electricity into thermal 
for heating purposes such as thermal treatment  energy is very efficient. It is technically possible for 
(mainly in heaters and furnaces), drying, and  the separation of bitumen, hydrogen production for 
steam generation. These emissions are more  upgrading, and refining and pipelining operations to 
challenging to reduce than in other sectors  use electricity instead of natural gas.
due to the high heat requirements of certain 
A study by the Canadian Energy Research Institute 
processes. Technology solutions exist, often with 
has looked at scenarios for the electrification of oil 
deep GHG reduction potential, however market 
sands production using hydropower and increased 
barriers to adoption are such that significant 
electricity transmission capacity. Overall, the study 
investments may be required to achieve large-
finds that the use of hydropower could potentially 
scale commercial uptake. 
reduce the GHG emissions of oil sands operations 
by 13-16%. Reductions are possible from a range of 
4.3.2  Electrification of industrial operations offers 
technologies that could require significant investment 
emissions reduction potential
in infrastructure as well as the application of new 
technologies. The potential for reductions could 
Many Canadian industries are already electrifying 
be even higher with the development of in-situ 
their operations or discovering other innovative ways 
extraction using electricity for heating purposes, 
to lower GHG emissions. For example, motor systems 
but many of these technologies are still under 
such as pumps, fans, conveyers, and compressors 
development.
are almost entirely powered by electricity in 
some sectors. Electrified operations can be set for 
In general, several options exist to decarbonise 
production during off-peak electricity periods to 
heavy industry, but significant R&D, piloting, and 
benefit from lower electricity prices. Specific sub-
commercialisation support are required to allow  
sectors, such as the aluminium industry, where 
their penetration.
smelting processes are highly energy intensive, 
are already relying on non-emitting electricity to 
fulfil their power demands. The energy intensity of  4.3.3  Cogeneration reduces waste heat and 
aluminium plants has also decreased over time,  generates thermal and electric energy, 
leading to reduced electricity demand per unit   thereby producing environmental and 
of output. economic benefits.
In the iron and steel sector, some Canadian plants  Cogeneration, also called combined heat and 
operate with electric arc furnaces that produce steel  power (CHP), produces electrical and thermal 
from recycled metal and require significantly less  energy simultaneously by using a single fuel for 
energy compared to conventional processes using  heating or cooling applications. Cogeneration 
ore. In the glass industry, electric glass melting tanks  allows for gains in energy efficiency as it can use 
can be used, while in the pulp and paper industry,  waste from one process as an energy input into 
electricity can be used for mechanical pulping. In  another. The main types of cogeneration systems 
the mining sector, hybrid diesel-electric equipment  include steam turbines, gas turbines, reciprocating 
could be used in underground mines and fully  engines, microturbines, combined cycle gas turbines 
electric vehicles could further reduce emissions and  and organic rankine cycles. Cogeneration requires 
diminish needs for ventilation. maximizing electricity production, while matching 
thermal load requirements to the extent possible in 
In Canada’s oil sands, extracting and upgrading  terms of quantity and energy quality.81 The energy 
bitumen is an energy-intensive process where large  savings from cogeneration relative to standalone 
amounts of thermal energy and electricity are used.  generation range from 5% to 35%.
Further electrification of processes, including the 
electrification of heat (for example electro-thermal or  In Canada, about 7% of electricity generation 
radio frequency electromagnetic heating), provides  is produced from cogeneration. Most energy 
an avenue to decarbonisation, but requires a clean  generated from cogeneration (both electric and 
electricity source.  thermal) is from the utility, paper and wood products, 
and oil and gas extraction sectors. Growth in 
The adoption of electric steam generators to replace  cogeneration occurred during two periods. In the 
natural-gas fired steam generators could reduce 
81   Canadian Industrial Energy End-Use Data and Analysis Centre, 
direct emissions. Electric steam generators use 
Cogeneration Facilities in Canada 2014, p. 7.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 471970s cogeneration capacity increased in response  improving energy efficiency through programs and 
to a significant increase in energy prices. The  standards could help drive significant reductions 
second period of growth occurred in the 1990s as a  in the demand for energy. Although electrification 
response to many socio-economic factors including  is key, the recovery and use of waste heat should 
increasing cost-effectiveness and full retail access  be pursued across subsectors concurrently. Other 
to the electricity grid in Alberta. Cogeneration has  innovative ideas that could support energy use 
the potential to achieve significant energy savings,  optimisation include the development of industrial 
particularly in the oil sands sector, as the extraction  eco-parks which facilitate the exchange of excess 
and upgrading processes require large amounts of  energy and industrial by-products, and minimise 
heat and steam.  transportation requirements between facilities. 
In order to fully maximise the potential of  In oil sands operations, the adoption of innovative 
cogeneration to reduce GHG emissions, the  low-carbon extraction processes offers potential 
adoption of certain technologies may be necessary,  GHG emission reductions. Advanced technologies, 
including those that optimise load matching, improve  such as solvent and electrothermal-based extraction 
operations in harsh environments, and allow for  methods for in situ, or direct contact steam 
biomass gasification, advanced power cycles, and  generation, are at a stage of development whereby 
high-penetration of renewables into fossil thermal  they offer a substantial opportunity to reduce 
cycles (e.g., solar thermal pre-heating of the inlet air  emissions.  These innovations could offer up to 50% 
to gas turbines).  GHG emissions reductions per barrel produced and 
could prove pivotal in delivering economically and 
environmentally competitive fossil fuel supplies to 
4.3.4  Other improvements in energy efficiency 
a decarbonising global market. Vacuum-insulated 
through innovative ways of optimising 
tubes can also be used to save heat in the process 
energy production and consumption will 
of moving the steam down the well and could 
be essential
accelerate the pre-heating process of the well 
Energy efficiency measures that improve processes  significantly.83 Further, some of these innovative 
and reduce heat loss can be implemented across  extraction techniques leave the heavier contents 
sectors using current best available technologies.  of the bitumen in the reservoir, meaning less diluent 
Heat management practices can improve heat  is needed in pipelines.  Not having to store these 
production and heat transfer to and within process  heavier contents, for which there are fewer markets, 
users. Innovative waste heat recovery technologies  also reduces operating costs and GHG emissions. 
can help reduce energy consumption, production 
In the mining industry, ventilation-on-demand can be 
costs, and emissions in industrial facilities. 
adopted to reduce the energy consumption required 
Energy efficiency measures include process  to ventilate underground metal mines. For example, 
optimisation; operation and control improvement;  a medium-size nickel mine with diesel equipment 
waste heat recovery and upgrading for heat,  and 10 operating levels emits about 10,000 tonnes of 
cold, or power production; and new technology  CO  annually. Estimated energy cost savings from the 
2
and process development. Examples of process  adoption of ventilation on demand technology can 
optimisation include adopting proper motor sizes  reach 50% depending on the size of the mine.
to optimise power use, and using adjustable-speed 
drives. Frequent and proper maintenance and repair 
4.3.5  Carbon capture and storage, fuel 
can also improve energy efficiency of equipment. In 
switching to non-emitting fuels, and 
some industries, there are potential solutions which 
recycling can also reduce emissions.  
involve entirely changing production processes to 
These technologies continue to improve
reduce energy requirements. For example, the pulp 
and paper industry can use chemical additives to  Beyond the electricity sector, carbon capture and 
reduce the heat required to dry paper.82  storage (CCS) also has potential in the oil and 
gas, iron and steel, pulp and paper, chemical, 
For the oil and gas sector, energy efficiency  and cement sectors. CCS is currently being 
and energy use optimisation can amplify the  used to capture emissions from steam methane 
emissions abatement potential of electrification  reformers. The Shell Quest Project, which has been 
and other options. For example, deploying energy  in operation since November 2015, captures and 
management systems to oil and gas facilities and 
82   Energy Economics, Optimizing the Energy Efficiency of  83   Council of Canadian Academies, Technology and Policy 
Conventional Multi-Cylinder Dryers in the Paper Industry, p.35. Options for a Low-Emission Energy System in Canada, p. 92.
48 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYTHE USE OF BIOMASS FOR CEMENT MANUFACTURING 
Bioenergy as a replacement for fossil fuels in cement making is currently at the commercial 
demonstration phase in Canada.  For example, the Lafarge plant in Bath, Ontario, was funded under 
the ecoENERGY Innovation Initiative to demonstrate a 10% coal-to-biomass fuel switching project.  This 
includes processing the raw materials into a useful form, developing and installing an injection system, 
running fuel trials, and compiling the results of the carbon savings resulting from this process.  The results 
of these trials will inform the permanent use of low-carbon fuels at the Bath plant and could be used by 
other companies in the cement industry.84 
sequesters 1 million tonnes of CO  per year from  more technological advances would be required 
2
the Shell Scotford steam methane reformers.  to make CCS economic. With the knowledge and 
The Alberta Carbon Trunk Line (ACTL), a project  technological advancements spurred from  
under development, is a 240 km pipeline that will  projects currently underway, the cost of CCS could 
capture and use CO emissions for enhanced oil  go down in the future and be applied in other 
2
recovery from the facilities in the Alberta Industrial  industrial sectors. 
Heartland. The initial industrial facilities that will 
Fuel-switching options are also available to 
capture and supply CO are Agrium Inc. and the 
2
industrial sectors. As mentioned previously, the oil 
Sturgeon Refinery. The ACTL will have the capacity to 
and gas sector can use solvents instead of natural 
permanently store about 14.6 million tonnes of CO
2 
gas in SAGD applications, despite being relatively 
annually as of 2017.
expensive at the moment. Using electricity instead  
Some barriers for deployment of CCS technology  of fossil fuels is also a possibility. Finally, biomass waste 
in these sectors remain, such as lack of economic  can be used by many sectors, including oil and gas 
capture technology and infrastructure to connect  and cement, to replace more carbon  
carbon source with sequestration formations. This  intensive energies.
will require significant investments and pipeline 
The recycling of materials in many industrial sectors is 
network construction. In the upstream oil and gas 
another option to reduce GHG emissions as it reduces 
sector, relevant carbon capture technology for 
needs for energy, raw materials, and landfill space. 
in-situ boilers and cogeneration units could be 
For example, in the pulp and paper sector, recovered 
available within a 10 to 15 year timeframe. However, 
paper can be recycled through chemical pulping 
84  Natural Resources Canada, Low Carbon Fuel Demonstration   instead of producing paper from new feedstocks. 
Pilot Plant.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 49Another example is the reuse of recycled plastic in the  low profit margins. Bargaining power of suppliers and 
chemical and petrochemical sector as a substitute to  buyers, the threat of substitutes and new entrants, and 
polymer based inputs. Plastic waste that cannot be  the level of rivalry between competitors are some of 
recycled can be used as an energy input - In the iron  the factors that determine how competitive industries 
and steel sector it can be burned as a replacement  are in global markets. Many companies face global 
for coal or coke – or as a feedstock in other sectors.  prices for their outputs, meaning that they must contain 
The use of recycled scrap metal materials to produce  their production costs in order to remain competitive. 
iron and steel can also lead to emission reductions as  Canadian oil producers operate in a global market 
producing iron and steel from iron ore requires more  and they are essentially price takers for their outputs, 
energy than from scrap.85   which requires them to look at ways of reducing their 
production and transportation costs in order to remain 
Figure 11 (below) illustrates the world GHG  competitive. Moreover, these companies may face 
reduction potential estimated by the IEA from  additional challenges associated with decreasing 
four types of industrial GHG emissions reductions  global demand for their goods in the future as 
technologies for IEA’s low-demand and high-demand  governments act to mitigate GHG emissions.  Canadian 
scenarios. According to the IEA, energy efficiency  natural gas producers are currently competing in 
improvements, switching to low-carbon fuels,  a continental market. In the future, with additional 
increased recycling, and new innovative processes  liquefied natural gas plants expected to come online, 
such as CCS will all be needed to decarbonise large  the global natural gas market is expected to be 
industrial emitters. increasingly integrated.  
Innovation in these sectors is likely to yield significant 
4.3.6  Nevertheless, there remain challenges 
benefits to companies that can improve processes 
in reducing emissions from some sectors, 
and technologies to reduce emissions. Government 
for which innovation and research and 
and private sector funding will be required for further 
development will be necessary
research and development to promote technology 
Emissions-intensive industrial sectors often face  innovations in many strategic areas pertaining to 
challenges in reducing GHG emissions as many of  industrial emissions. These include CCS technologies 
their emission sources are difficult to address through  to reduce costs and improve efficiency, industrial 
cost-effective electrification, energy efficiency, or fuel- efficiency improvements, fuel switching to bioenergy 
switching. These challenges are compounded as many  and the conversion of biomass into bio-based products 
industries also face competitive pressures due to their  and bioenergy, technologies to address process 
exposure to international trade competition, and their  emissions, and enhanced recycling capabilities.
85  International Energy Agency, Energy Technology  
Transitions for Industry.
Figure 11: World reduction potential from existing technologies for large industrial emitters
Source: International Energy Agency, Energy Technology Perspectives 2015
50 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY5  Non-Carbon Dioxide Emissions
KEY MESSAGES:
•  Non-carbon dioxide climate warming emissions include short-lived 
climate pollutants (SLCPs) and nitrous oxide, a long-lived GHG. Non-
carbon dioxide emissions have significantly greater warming effects 
per tonne than carbon dioxide. 
•  The only way to meet the 1.5 to 2°C temperature goal encompassed in 
the Paris Agreement is to take early global action on carbon dioxide and 
short-lived non-carbon dioxide emissions together.
•  Reducing short lived climate pollutants has considerable benefits beyond 
those that are climate related, such as improving air quality, human 
health, and environmental and ecosystem outcomes.
•  Current technology and know-how has the potential to significantly 
reduce non-carbon dioxide emissions, often helping to slow the rate of 
near-term warming.
5 1  Non-carbon dioxide climate warming emissions include emissions of  
short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs) and nitrous oxide, a long-lived GHG  
Non-carbon dioxide emissions have significantly greater warming effects 
per tonne than carbon dioxide  
Short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs) are potent greenhouse gases (GHGs) and air 
pollutants. They have relatively short atmospheric lifetimes compared to longer-lived 
GHGs such as carbon dioxide (CO ), and have a warming impact on the climate. SLCPs 
2
include methane, hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), and ground-level ozone, as well as black 
carbon, a component of particulate matter.  Black carbon is also an air pollutant, 
resulting from the incomplete combustion of fossil fuels and biomass. Ground-level ozone 
is also an air pollutant and key contributor to smog, which is associated with adverse 
impacts on human and ecosystem health. Nitrous oxide is a long-lived GHG.
Figure 12 below illustrates Canada’s greenhouse gas emissions in terms of CO 
2
equivalency where non- CO emissions account for around 21% of total emissions. 
2
Methane and nitrous oxide are the two main non-CO  GHGs emitted and originate 
2
mostly from fossil fuel related activities, livestock farming, and industrial processes. 
Although HFC emissions are not currently a significant contributor to total GHG emissions 
in Canada, in the absence of the recent phase-down amendment to the Montreal 
Protocol, they were projected to more than triple between 2013 and 2030.
Methane emissions, which account for 15% of total GHG emissions in Canada,86 are 
significant contributors to climate impacts. In addition, methane contributes to the 
formation of ground-level ozone. The oil and gas sector accounted for 44% of Canada’s 
methane emissions in 2014, largely from oil and natural gas fugitive sources, including 
venting . The remainder of Canada’s methane emissions arises largely from agriculture 
and solid waste disposal. 
86   The GHG estimate of 108 Mt for methane (15% of total Canadian GHG emissions) uses a global warming 
potential of 25 consistent with the IPCC fourth assessment report.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 51Figure 12: Canada’s Emissions Breakdown by Greenhouse Gas (2014)
Source: National Inventory Report 1990-2014: Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks in Canada – Executive Summary,  
Environment and Climate Change Canada, 2016. 
Nitrous oxide emissions account for 5% of total  Amendment and will continue to play a leadership 
Canadian GHG emissions. The burning of fossil fuels  role in implementing the Montreal Protocol, including 
results in the oxidization of the nitrogen contained in  the HFC amendment, notably by hosting the 29th 
the fuel and the air creates nitrous oxide emissions.  Meeting of the Parties in 2017, which marks the 
These emissions come mainly from coal-fired power  Montreal Protocol’s 30th anniversary.
plants as well as cars and trucks. Industrial processes, 
particularly those involved in the production of nitric  The potency of HFCs varies by species and ranges 
and adipic acid, also cause nitrous oxide emissions  from <1 to 10,800 times that of CO2 over a 20-
through the oxidization of nitrogen compounds.  year period, and <1 to 12,400 that of CO2 over 
Over 70% of total nitrous oxide emissions emitted in  a 100-year period.87 HFCs are used in the same 
Canada are from the agricultural sector, mainly from  applications which ozone-depleting substances 
crop and animal production. In crop production,  have been used. In Canada, HFC use is mainly 
nitrous oxide emissions arise mostly from the use of  confined to the following sectors: insulating foam 
synthetic fertilizers where the addition of nitrogen  products (50%), refrigeration and air-conditioning 
to soils helps the nutrient absorption of plants and  equipment in buildings and industrial operations 
allows bacteria contained in the soil to produce extra  (30%), air-conditioning in vehicles (13%), and aerosols 
energy to grow. Microbial processes involved in these  (7%).  Since HFCs are being used as replacements 
activities then produce releases of nitrous   for ozone depleting substances, including 
oxide emissions.  hydrochlorofluorocarbons (HCFCs) that are still in the 
process of being eliminated, their use and emissions 
HFCs are synthesized chemicals used as  are increasing as HCFCs are being phased out. In 
replacements for ozone-depleting substances.   addition, in the absence of the recent phase-down 
Internationally, atmospheric observations show that  amendment to the Montreal Protocol, HFC emissions 
the volume of HFCs in the atmosphere is increasing  would be expected to increase because of greater 
rapidly, about 10 to 15% per year. To address  demand for refrigeration and air conditioning 
concerns regarding an estimated increase in HFC  throughout the economy.  
emissions to 10% or more of total CO equivalent 
2
According to Canada’s black carbon emissions 
emissions by 2050, the 197 Parties to the Montreal 
inventory, 43 kt of black carbon were emitted = 
Protocol agreed to an amendment to phase-down 
in 2014.  Black carbon emissions are estimated to 
the use and production of HFCs on October 15th, 
be the third largest contributor to current global 
2016. The “Kigali Amendment” could help to avoid 
almost 0.5oC of global warming by the end of the  warming, after CO2 and methane. Black carbon 
century.  Canada was a strong supporter of the HFC 
87   Myrhe et al., Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing.
52 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYFigure 13: Global Temperature Projections Relative to 1890-1910 averages
Source: UNEP Integrated Assessment of Black Carbon and Tropospheric Ozone, Summary for Policy Makers 
Note: Bars on the right show estimated ranges for 2070.
influences the climate in multiple ways: by directly  deleterious effects on human health, damages 
heating surrounding air when suspended in the  plants, and affects agricultural crop production. In 
atmosphere; by reducing the reflectivity of the earth’s  Canada, the transportation and oil and gas sectors 
surface when deposited, an effect particularly  are key sources of ozone precursors. Residential wood 
strong over snow and ice; and through additional  combustion is also a significant source of  
indirect effects related to interaction with clouds.  CO emissions.
Black carbon is estimated to be 3,200 (270 to 6,200) 
times more potent a warming agent than CO 
2 5 2  The only way to meet the 1 5 to 2°C 
over a 20-year period.88 Reducing uncertainties 
temperature goal encompassed in the 
related to quantifying the overall warming effects 
Paris Agreement is to take early global 
of black carbon represents an active area of 
action on carbon dioxide and non-carbon 
scientific research internationally.  Black carbon 
dioxide emissions together 
also has significant effects on human health, 
including respiratory and cardiovascular effects,  Recent scientific studies indicate that the only way 
as well as premature death.  The transportation  to meet temperature commitments in the Paris 
sector accounts for 62% of Canada’s black carbon  Agreement is to take early global action on CO  and 
2
emissions, followed by residential wood-burning,  SLCPs, together. The United Nations Environmental 
accounting for about 27% of national emissions. Program’s (UNEP) Integrated Assessment of Black 
Carbon and Tropospheric Ozone concludes that 
Ozone is not directly emitted, but forms in the 
reducing black carbon and tropospheric ozone now 
atmosphere as a product of precursor gases 
will slow the rate of climate change within the first 
including nitrogen oxides (NO ), volatile organic 
X half of this century.
compounds (VOCs) - including methane - and 
carbon monoxide (CO). Ground-level ozone is a  The UNEP assessment notes that deep and 
powerful GHG, a significant contributor to current  immediate CO  reductions are required to limit 
2
warming, and a key component of smog. It has  long-term warming, and this cannot be achieved 
by addressing short-lived climate forcers alone. 
88  GWP20 from Bond et al. (2013). Bounding the role of black 
carbon in the climate system: A scientific assessment. The use of  However, it goes on to note that implementation of 
the GWP here is to help communicate the potential contribution  measures on black carbon and methane globally by 
of black carbon mitigation to reducing near-term warming. 
Given the very different ways black carbon and CO influence  2030 could reduce future global warming by 0.5˚C by 
2
climate and their vastly different lifetimes in the atmosphere,  2050 and by as much as 0.7˚C in the Arctic by 2040, 
there is not yet scientific consensus on a metric to quantify black 
and together with early action on CO , this is the only 
carbon relative to CO2. Further research to reduce uncertainties  2
and develop more appropriate metrics is needed.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 53way to limit the global average temperature rise to  Health Organization (WHO) noted that black carbon 
well below 2˚C (Figure 13).   is a “carrier” of other pollutants, delivering them 
deep into the respiratory system, and further that 
The expected climate benefits of such an approach  a reduction in exposure to PM  containing black 
2.5
are particularly relevant for Canada as an Arctic 
carbon should lead to a reduction in the health 
nation. In Canada, the Arctic warmed by 2.2°C 
effects associated with PM .
2.5
between 1948 and 2013 resulting in significant 
impacts to local populations and sensitive 
5 4  Current technology and know-how has 
ecosystems. Black carbon is of particular significance 
the potential to significantly reduce non-
in the Arctic due to its additional warming effect 
carbon dioxide emissions, often helping to 
when deposited onto snow or ice, which  
slow the rate of near-term warming 
accelerates melting. 
Many solutions exist to reduce important sources 
5 3  Reducing short lived climate pollutants has  of non-CO  emissions. In general, measures that 
2
considerable benefits beyond those that  help promote the transition towards cleaner energy 
are climate related, improving air quality  sources will reduce both CO and SLCP emissions 
2
and human and ecosystem health  over the long term by reducing the use of fossil fuels. 
However, slowing the rate of near-term warming 
Given that many SLCPs are also air pollutants,  requires more targeted SLCP emissions reductions 
reducing emissions also provides a key opportunity  strategies, as many are emitted from a large number 
to also improve air quality, generating local health  of small sources. Canada has made a number 
benefits for Canadians and reducing impacts to  of recent significant commitments to advance 
ecosystems and agricultural productivity.  SLCP mitigation priorities together with continental 
partners, under the Leaders’ Statement on a North 
Ground-level ozone, a potent GHG, has several 
American Climate, Clean Energy and Environment 
other deleterious environmental effects. As a key 
Partnership (NALS Statement), including the 
component of smog, ozone leads to significant 
commitment to develop and implement a national 
human health impacts such as respiratory and 
methane strategy that will consider how to address 
cardiac problems. These health problems result in 
methane from key sources.
significant losses to Canada’s economy through 
hospital visits and lost productivity.  Most methane emissions from the oil and gas sector 
come from venting and fugitive emissions. These 
Ground-level ozone also influences crop yield 
include venting from wells and batteries, fugitive 
by interfering with the ability of sensitive plants to 
equipment leaks, storage tanks, pneumatic devices, 
produce and store food, subsequently increasing their 
well completions, and compressors. Cost-effective 
vulnerability to certain diseases, insects, harsh weather, 
technologies are readily available and tackling 
and other pollutants. These negative impacts may 
methane emissions from the oil and gas sector is 
translate into reduced crop yields and, consequently, 
one of the lowest cost reduction opportunities to 
lower sales revenue for crop producers. In addition, 
achieve significant GHG reductions. Canada has 
ground-level ozone may increase the risk of illness or 
committed to reducing methane emissions from the 
premature death within sensitive wildlife or livestock 
oil and gas sector by 40 to 45% below 2012 levels 
populations, potentially resulting in significant treatment 
by 2025. To implement this commitment, Canada 
costs or economic losses for the agri-food industry. 
intends to publish proposed regulations to reduce 
Thus, reducing emissions of ozone precursors, namely 
venting and fugitive methane emissions from oil 
methane, VOCs, CO and NO, can reduce mortality 
X and gas sources by early 2017. Canada has also 
and morbidity rates in the Canadian population, 
endorsed the World Bank’s Zero Routine Flaring by 
improve quality of life, as well as increase  
2030 initiative, which will support reductions in black 
economic productivity. 
carbon emissions resulting from routine flaring at oil 
production facilities. Canada has been consulting 
Short-term and long-term exposure to PM , of which 
2.5
with provinces, territories, industry, non-governmental 
black carbon is a component, is also associated 
organizations and Indigenous peoples on the 
with a broad range of human health impacts, 
development of the federal regulatory approach. 
including respiratory and cardiovascular effects 
as well as premature death. In its 2012 assessment 
of the health effects of black carbon, the World 
54 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYAccurately quantifying non-CO  emissions is  Further reducing emissions from Canada’s largest 
2
challenging, particularly fugitive emissions. This can  sources of black carbon emissions, existing diesel 
be explained by the fact that methane leaks are  vehicles and engines, and wood-burning appliances, 
often only detected and repaired sometime after  will require targeted actions to address barriers 
they start. Another source of uncertainty relates to  related to long vehicle, engine and appliance 
fugitives arising from the hydraulic fracturing process  lifetimes, and influencing the consumers that own 
required to extract shale gas, a growing source of  many of these small, distributed sources to retrofit or 
natural gas supply in Canada. As a result, current  replace them with cleaner technologies.
inventory techniques are likely underestimating 
fugitive emissions. In response to this issue, many  Measures to address ozone precursors are often  
scientific initiatives have been initiated to better  part of air quality policies, driven primarily by human 
estimate these sources including research and  health concerns.  Measures to reduce  
development to estimate emissions such as  ozone precursors in the transportation sector also 
undertaking atmospheric measurement campaigns,  often reduce black carbon as a co-benefit.   
and new measurement technology such as infrared  Ozone precursors from industrial sources should  
imagery.89 The use of both top-down and bottom- also be addressed. 
up estimates will support improved understanding 
Adjusting fertilizer rates with plant needs, placing 
of methane from oil and gas sources. Canada has 
fertilizer near plant roots, applying fertilizer more 
committed to working with continental partners to 
frequently instead of only once, and using slow-
enhance the effectiveness of emission inventories for 
release forms can limit nitrogen in soils and reduce 
methane emissions from the oil and gas sector.
nitrous oxide emission. In the same fashion, using 
manure more efficiently can also reduce nitrous 
The March 10, 2016, Canada-U.S. Joint Statement 
oxide emissions. Other practices such as increased 
recognizes the importance of improving the 
use of legumes as a nitrogen source, use of cover 
quantification of emissions. Canada is committed 
crops to remove excess available nitrogen, less use 
to working with continental partners to improve 
of summer fallow, and adjusting tillage intensity 
emission inventories of methane emissions from the oil 
can also contribute to reducing emissions in the 
and gas sector.    
agriculture sector.90 These options can yield co-
In the waste sector, technology for landfill gas  benefits such as reducing the cost of production (as 
recovery and utilization is well established and  less fertilizer is used), saving on the use of fossil fuels 
readily available for both new and existing  needed to produce fertilizers, and reducing the 
landfills.  Depending on landfill age and access to  pollution resulting from nitrates, ammonia, and other 
infrastructure, landfill gas recovery and utilization  nitrogen substances released in the environment.
can also be highly cost-effective.  Under the NALS 
Statement, Canada has committed to take action  In the industrial sector, adipic acid plants can use 
to reduce emissions from landfills, and to implement  proven and commercially available technology 
voluntary measures to reduce and recover   using catalytic and thermal destruction techniques 
food waste.  with reduction efficiencies ranging between 90% and 
99%. In nitric acid plants, the use of non-selective 
Technologies to reduce black carbon emissions from  catalytic reduction and selective catalytic reduction 
the transportation sector are also proven.  Canada’s  is possible to reduce nitrous oxide emissions by as 
low sulphur content in fuel regulations enable the  much as 90%.91  
use and effective operation of vehicle and engine 
exhaust after-treatment systems, such as diesel 
particulate filters, which can nearly eliminate black 
carbon emissions. Transportation sector air pollutant 
regulations for on- and off-road vehicles and engines 
are helping to drive down black carbon emissions 
from this sector.
89  Glancy, R., Quantifying Fugitive Emission Factors from  90   Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. Nitrous Oxide.
Unconventional Natural Gas Production Using IPCC  91   International Energy Agency. Abatement of other Greenhouse 
Methodologies. Gases – Nitrous Oxide.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 55Several Canadian companies and end users  Meanwhile, major automobile manufacturers 
have developed and implemented innovative  operating in Canada have started to manufacture 
technologies to transition from current HFC  new models with air conditioners using climate-
technologies, and have an opportunity to take a  friendly alternatives instead of HFCs.  Those actions 
lead role in the transition to non-HFC technologies.  are also helping to increase energy efficiency. For 
For instance, some Canadian supermarkets are  example, for some applications, replacing HFCs 
converting their refrigeration systems to enable the  with climate-friendly refrigerants and technologies 
use of refrigerants with very low global warming  can improve energy efficiency by up to 50%. The 
potentials, that are more energy efficient, and yield  Government of Canada plans to publish proposed 
significant cost savings. For example, Sobeys has  regulatory measures to phase down HFCs in Canada, 
converted over 70 of its stores to climate-friendly,  including prohibitions on the manufacture and 
home-grown innovative technologies and plans to  import of products and equipment containing or 
extend such conversions to its 1,300 stores across   designing to contain HFCs by the end of 2016. 
the country.  
56 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY6  Forests 
KEY MESSAGES:
•  The Paris Agreement highlights the critical role that forests play in 
achieving the global net-zero emissions objective in the second half of 
the century. With its vast managed forest land, Canada has significant 
potential for long-term forest-based GHG mitigation. 
•  Choices about mitigation strategies will be influenced by the slow-growing 
nature and high rate of natural disturbances in Canada’s forests.
•  Forest-related mitigation can involve either reducing or avoiding emissions, 
or enhancing carbon sequestration. The potential becomes even clearer 
when impacts are assessed on a life-cycle basis.
•  A substantial reduction in emissions and increase in removals by 2050 is 
possible through measures such as changes in how forests are managed, 
greater domestic use of long-lived wood products, greater use of 
bioenergy from waste wood, and afforestation.
•  There are a number of emerging opportunities in which the forestry sector 
could contribute to mitigation outcomes that require further consideration.
6 1  The Paris Agreement highlights the critical role that forests play in achieving 
the global net-zero emissions objective in the second half of the century  
With its vast forest land, Canada has significant potential for long-term 
forest-based GHG mitigation 
Forests play an important role in the carbon cycle by sequestering a significant amount 
of carbon, thereby reducing net CO emissions to the atmosphere. It is estimated that 
2
globally, forests offset the equivalent of about 24% of anthropogenic emissions from 
the atmosphere.92 As noted in the Paris Agreement, a balance between emissions and 
removals of greenhouse gases in the second half of the century is needed to ensure that 
global warming is limited to well below two degrees Celsius.93 It is therefore important 
to recognise that without actions to protect, conserve, and sustainably manage forests 
globally, it will not be possible to achieve the net-zero emissions required to reach  
this objective. 
Considering the vast size and economic impact of its forest, Canada has a responsibility 
to carefully consider the mitigation potential of its forest sector. Canada’s forest is 
the third largest in the world, at 347.6 million hectares,94 and Canada’s forest industry 
contributes significantly to the economy as a major employer nationwide, with nominal 
GDP of $22.1 billion in 2015.95 By value, Canada is the world’s leading exporter of 
softwood lumber, newsprint and chemical wood pulp.96 Canada’s forward-looking 
forest-related mitigation actions can thus have a significant impact.
Given their traditional relationship with forests, Indigenous peoples have an important 
role to play in planning and managing forest resources. In 2011, 70% of Indigenous 
92   Smyth et al., Quantifying the biophysical climate change mitigation potential of Canada’s forest sector.
93   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, Paris Agreement, Art. 4.
94   Canada’s National Forest Inventory Resources, Statistical Summaries for Canada:  Forest Area.
95   Natural Resources Canada’s calculations based on Statistics Canada’s CANSIM table 379-0031.
96   Natural resources Canada, The State of Canada’s Forests 2015.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 57communities were located in forested areas.97  northern conditions. Mitigation strategies that rely on 
Indigenous peoples account for 4.8% of the total  forest growth to sequester carbon must therefore be 
forest sector workforce in Canada, compared  implemented soon in order for significant mitigation 
to 3% of the total workforce.98 The participation  benefits to be realised by 2050.
of Indigenous people in land-use decisions and 
The factors described above, as well as 
sustainable forest management will be a key 
considerations related to natural disturbances such 
component of the long-term contribution of 
as forest fires and the impact of climate change on 
Canada’s forests to climate change mitigation. 
the forest, will influence the development of forest-
related mitigation. Sustainable forest management 
6 2  Choices about mitigation strategies will 
already balances multiple objectives but now 
be influenced by the slow-growing nature 
must also increasingly tackle the twin challenges 
and high rate of natural disturbances in 
of mitigation and adaptation. This underscores the 
Canada’s forests 
importance of developing a long-term strategy that 
will build on actions planned in the short- to medium-
A large proportion of Canada’s forests are old and 
term and ensure that forest-related mitigation can 
slow-growing. When harvested, much of the biomass 
make a substantial contribution to the  
is converted to wood products that can store the 
mid-century target.
carbon for a long period of time, depending on 
the product.  Harvest residues left in the forest 
decompose over time or may be burned to reduce  6 3  Forest-related mitigation can involve 
the risk of wildfire. All forests harvested on public  either reducing or avoiding emissions, 
land must be regenerated according to policies  or enhancing carbon sequestration  
and legislation on sustainable forest management,99  The potential for forest-based mitigation 
but it takes time for trees to grow in Canada’s cold,  becomes even clearer when impacts are 
assessed on a life-cycle basis  
97  Government of Canada, Indigenous Peoples and Forestry in 
Canada. As noted in the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report, it is 
98  Natural Resources Canada, Aboriginal Participation in the Forest  important to examine total mitigation effects across 
Sector.
99   Ibid, p.26. All areas of provincial Crown land that are harvested  the forest and forest products system on a life-cycle 
for timber are required to be regenerated using natural or  basis, taking into account emissions and removals 
artificial means (i.e., planting and seeding), or a mix of the two. 
in the forest, storage of carbon in harvested wood 
Standards and regulations for achieving successful regeneration 
vary by province.
58 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYproducts (HWP), land-use changes, and avoided  forest management that produces harvested wood 
emissions in other sectors from the substitution of  products annually while maintaining or increasing 
HWP or bioenergy for other more emissions-intensive  forest carbon stocks will generate the largest 
products and fossil fuels.100  sustained mitigation benefit in the long run.102   
Assessment of mitigation strategies must take  
6.4.1  Change in Forest Management Practices
into consideration biophysical, technical and 
economic factors. The biophysical mitigation 
Given that close to 90% of forests in Canada 
potential sets the boundaries around what is 
are owned by provinces and territories,103  these 
physically possible to achieve in the forest, while  
jurisdictions will need to identify and implement 
the technical and economic costs determine  
changes in forest management practices most 
what is feasible to accomplish.101   
relevant to their region. Mitigation actions must be 
balanced with other sustainable forest management 
6 4  Analyses show that a substantial reduction  priorities, but could include higher utilisation of 
in emissions and increase in removals by  residual and harvested wood, reduced burning of 
2050 is possible through measures such  harvest residues in the forests, increased planting to 
as changes in how we manage forests,  rehabilitate forests after natural disturbances, and 
greater domestic use of long-lived wood  increased planting intensity to improve forest growth 
products, greater use of bioenergy from  after harvest. 
waste wood, and afforestation 
In addition to their substantial long-term mitigation 
Realising forest-related GHG mitigation potential  potential, changes in forest management practices 
will require a focus on actions that help reduce  could create co-benefits, including increased 
emissions and increase the carbon stored in trees,  employment in the forest sector, reductions in black 
soils, and forest products. In general, in the short- to  carbon emissions (where there is a reduction in 
medium-term, options that avoid emissions and  slash burning), and increased adaptation efforts to 
maintain forest and HWP stocks may offer the largest  improve the resilience of forests. 
mitigation results. In the longer-term, significant 
mitigation can result from options that increase 
6.4.2  Afforestation
harvesting over time and substitute forest biomass 
for more emissions-intensive products and energy  A future vision for Canada could include an expanded 
sources. In order to achieve longer-term mitigation,  forest area, however this would need to be achieved 
however, action is required in the near-term, even  without negatively affecting food production. There 
if mitigation benefits are not immediately visible.  has historically been relatively little afforestation in 
Moreover, in some cases, options that provide the  Canada,104 but this could provide substantial carbon 
greatest short-term results may not always provide  sequestration in the long-term. Various levels of 
the greatest mitigation in the long term. Therefore,  afforestation using mixes of fast-growing species and 
when assessing forest-related mitigation options, it is  slower-growing species could be used. Because of 
important to consider the potential for a longer-term  the time it takes for trees to grow in Canada it would 
contribution to a low-carbon economy and not just  take time for afforestation activities to begin to show 
the potential in the short and medium term. substantial carbon reductions. 
Analyses show that the mitigation actions with  Investments in afforestation could lead to co-benefits 
the greatest potential for medium and long-term  such as the diversification of rural economies, 
emissions reductions by mid-century in Canada  reduced forest fragmentation and enhanced 
include an integrated approach to changes in forest  forest habitat for wildlife, improved soil quality and 
management practices, increased afforestation,  watershed protection. Plantations generate revenue 
increased use of harvested wood for long-lived  over the long term through harvesting and re-growth 
products, and increased use of waste wood for  which act as an incentive to long-term management 
bioenergy in place of fossil fuels. These findings are  by landowners. Challenges in achieving large-scale 
in line with the findings of the Fourth Assessment  afforestation include the need to ensure a sufficient 
Report of the IPCC that indicate that sustainable 
102     Nabuurs et al., Forestry: Contribution of Working Group III to 
the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
100  Nabuurs et al., Forestry: Contribution of Working Group III to the  Climate Change. 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on  103   Natural Resources Canada, The State of Canada’s Forests 2015, 
Climate Change. p. 50.
101  Smyth et al., Quantifying the Biophysical Climate Change  104   Natural Resources Canada, The State of Canada’s Forests 2015, 
Mitigation Potential of Canada’s Forest Sector. p. 23.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 59supply of seedlings and to engage the interest of a  Canadian forest sector. In addition, there are 
sufficient number of landowners, as well as concerns  direct and indirect benefits for rural forest-based 
about the resilience of some tree species to changes  communities including energy autonomy, regional 
in climate and natural disturbances.  investment, and employment opportunities. 
Technology to support this option includes modern 
wood heating systems such as biomass-fueled 
6.4.3  Increased use of residual and harvested 
boilers and stoves and furnaces that use sustainable 
wood products for long-lived products 
wood-based feedstock. While this technology 
Life cycle research demonstrates that increased use  is commercially available, a bioenergy heating 
of sustainably produced wood products could lead to  initiative would depend on securing additional 
avoided GHG emissions in other sectors. In particular,  energy infrastructure investments as up-front costs 
the substitution of wood-based materials for more  would be high, particularly where the infrastructure in 
emissions-intensive materials (such as concrete and  not in place. 
steel) for construction and for fossil fuel in heating and 
Bio-based materials and chemicals are likely to gain 
energy applications provides some of the highest 
importance over the long term. There is a general 
mitigation opportunities. Canada can further invest 
consensus that the mid-century will bring a larger, 
in projects and activities that increase the use of 
more urban population and along with this comes 
harvested wood products in domestic construction 
the need for primary resources to sustain urban 
such as tall and mid-rise residential buildings, 
growth.  This, in turn, highlights the potential of forest-
commercial and industrial buildings, and bridges. 
based cellulosic material to replace not only a vast 
The expansion of wood end-uses could also  array of other materials used in building and energy, 
contribute to increasing the competitiveness of  as noted above, but also to replace materials and 
the Canadian forest sector by diversifying market  chemicals used in the manufacturing sector at large. 
opportunities and helping to maintain or create jobs.  The mitigation potential of cellulose-based products, 
While the technologies to implement this option are  their renewable nature, and their potential to 
already demonstrated, commercialised, and widely  further be recycled or to biodegrade is likely to spur 
used in other countries, Canada will need to analyse  increasing demand for these high value products. 
its National Building Code to ensure that it promotes  For example, natural fibers have already become 
the use of wood products in building design.  crucial in technical composite applications due to 
the demand for recyclable and biodegradable raw 
materials. The mitigation potential of cellulose-based 
6.4.4  Increased use of harvested wood 
products is highly dependent on their life cycle and 
products for bioenergy, advanced bio-
end uses as well as the uptake of bio-based material 
material, and bio-chemicals
as substitutes for traditional alternative feedstock and 
There are potential mitigation benefits from adopting  cannot be clearly ascertained yet.
waste wood biomass as a fuel source for electricity 
As a country advantaged with significant biomass 
or commercial, residential, and industrial heating 
resources and forest and agriculture sectors poised 
in place of fossil fuels or as a feedstock in the 
for transformation, the bioeconomy represents a 
manufacturing of advanced bio-material and bio-
substantial opportunity to generate wealth and jobs 
chemicals.  Mitigation benefits come from using local 
for Canadians. 
sustainably-sourced wood for bioenergy, with priority 
given to harvest residues and waste wood, which 
have lower emissions on a life-cycle basis compared  6 5  There are a number of emerging 
to the use of fossil fuels.105 Positive mitigation benefits  opportunities in which the forestry sector 
from bioenergy-related harvesting could occur  could contribute to mitigation outcomes 
in remote communities where local electricity is  that require further consideration 
produced from fossil fuels (e.g., diesel) that have 
been transported over long distances. 
6.5.1  Reducing deforestation
The co-benefits of using biofuels include 
Unlike tropical countries where deforestation is a 
diversification of market opportunities, leading 
major driver of emissions, deforestation (permanent 
to increased growth and competitiveness of the 
forest loss) in Canada is relatively low. Of the 
approximately 0.01% of Canada’s forest land that is 
105   Nabuurs et al., Forestry: Contribution of Working Group III to the 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on  lost annually, most is driven by agriculture and the 
Climate Change.
60 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYexpansion of the oil and gas industry.106 Given that 
the main drivers of deforestation vary across the 
country – and that the drivers of deforestation are 
usually outside of the forest sector – there has been 
limited ability within the forest sector to influence 
these emissions to date.  
Nonetheless, reducing deforestation and its 
associated emissions is an area that Canada can 
explore, especially considering the role Canada 
plays in supporting reducing emissions from 
deforestation and forest degradation in developing 
countries, and that Canada is a signatory to the 
New York Declaration on Forests, which aims to end 
global net deforestation by 2030. Collaboration with 
provinces and territories is required given the need 
to consider how to address deforestation across 
jurisdictions and diverse sectors.
6.5.2  Research and Development in Advanced 
Bio-materials, Bio-chemicals, Bioenergy 
and Biofuels
The mitigation potential of using harvested wood 
products for bioenergy and biofuels can be 
further explored. Bioenergy with carbon capture 
and storage (BECCS) has received considerable 
global attention because it can generate negative 
emissions. A longer-term option for bioenergy could 
focus on reducing costs along the supply chain and 
increasing investments in research and development 
of second-generation biofuel production, advanced 
materials, and new platform chemicals, for example, 
converting cellulosic biomass into bio-crude and 
refining it into other biofuel products (e.g., biodiesel, 
bio-kerosene and bio-chemicals), as well as 
gasifying or liquefying biomass for power production.  
Further investment in research, development and 
deployment of such technologies could identify new 
areas with mitigation potential.
6.5.3  Urban Forestry
Urban forests provide a number of co-benefits in 
addition to sequestering GHG emissions, such as 
energy conservation through cooling and shade, 
provision of wildlife habitat, noise buffering and 
improved aesthetics and increased property values. 
Future research and analysis in improved monitoring 
and research to capture mitigation potential and 
enhance resiliency of urban forests is an option for 
Canada to explore.
106   Natural Resources Canada, The State of Canada’s Forests 2015, 
p. 23.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 617  Agriculture
KEY MESSAGES:
•  The potential for greenhouse gas mitigation exists across the entire 
food system. There are opportunities and for consumers, farmers, food 
processors and municipalities to reduce and recycle energy and nutrients.
•  Agricultural emissions result mostly from biological processes rather than 
from energy use. 
•  Technological innovations and sustainable land management practices 
will ensure that agricultural soils remain a net carbon sink in Canada over 
the long-term.
•  Promoting the adoption of existing and emerging technologies and 
management practices could increase efficiency and reduce emissions 
from crop and livestock systems.
•  The Agriculture sector has the potential to provide renewable energy 
solutions and bio-products to help reduce emissions in other sectors. In 
evaluating these options, consideration should be given to the full life-
cycle environmental costs and benefits. 
7 1  The potential for greenhouse gas mitigation exists across the entire food 
system  There are opportunities for consumers, farmers, food processors 
and municipalities to reduce and recycle energy and nutrients  
Addressing GHG emissions from agriculture requires the examination of the entire food 
system’s life cycle from fertilizer manufacturing through to on-farm activities, food 
processing, distribution, and consumption. Moreover, the ultimate fate of food products, 
either as food waste, compost, or wastewater, needs to be taken into account.
This holistic approach seeks to improve the efficiency of the overall food system 
from “cradle to grave to cradle”, and can often draw out synergies between the 
environmental and health impacts of food choices. In this respect, more can be done 
to foster positive societal engagement and cooperation to help lower GHG emissions.  
There are increasingly higher expectations for transparency and product environmental 
attributes, including the relative amount of GHGs embodied in different food choices.
In the context of a global and growing demand for food products, alternative 
approaches like local food movements, organic and/or urban agriculture or family 
farmers networks can play an important role in shaping the future of agriculture.107  
Any approach that helps to minimise waste (see Chapter 8) and helps to conserve 
energy and water will decrease emissions in other sectors indirectly related to 
agriculture, for example, during fertilizer manufacturing, or by removing nitrogen and 
phosphorus from wastewater. 
107   Equiterre, Family Farmers Network.
62 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY7 2  Agricultural emissions result mostly from  Total emissions from agriculture have been relatively 
biological processes rather than from  stable since the year 2000 and are not projected to 
energy use   significantly increase toward 2030.110 In 2014, non-
energy emissions accounted for 59 megatonnes 
Primary agriculture is at the heart of a complex and  of carbon dioxide equivalent (Mt CO  eq) – 
2
integrated agri-food system which provides one in  approximately 8% of Canada’s total GHG emissions – 
eight jobs and accounted for more than 6% of GDP in  while GHG emissions from on-farm fuel use 
2014.108 The agriculture sector contributes to making  generated 14 Mt CO eq.111 The two main sources of 
2
Canada one of very few countries currently in a  non-combustion agricultural emissions are enteric 
position to produce more food than it consumes, and  fermentation and fertilizer application.
Canada is the fifth largest exporter of agriculture and 
agri-food products internationally.109 Efficiency gains, 
7 3  Technological innovations and sustainable 
sustainable land management, and innovation will 
land management practices will ensure 
enable Canadian agriculture to reduce emissions, 
that agricultural soils remain a net carbon 
store carbon, and meet a growing global  
sink in Canada over the long-term 
food demand.
For over twenty years, Canadian farmers in the Prairie 
Most agricultural greenhouse gas emissions are not 
provinces have been able to increasingly substitute 
driven by energy use but rather take the form of 
conventional tillage with no-till or conservation 
methane and nitrous oxide resulting predominantly 
tillage seeding techniques due to innovations 
from biological processes inherent to animal and 
such as improved seeds, fertilizers and pesticides, 
crop production. Nitrous oxide emissions can 
and changes in machinery and farm equipment, 
originate from field-applied fertilizers, crop residue 
including the evolution of technologies such as 
decomposition, cultivation of organic soils, and from 
global positioning systems. Increased crop rotation 
the storage of manure. Methane emissions are mainly 
a result of enteric fermentation in ruminant animals 
and decomposition of stored manure.
110  Environment and Climate Change Canada, Canada’s Second 
108  Agriculture and Agri-food Canada, An Overview of the  Biennial Report on Climate Change.
Canadian Agriculture and Agri-Food System 2016. 111  Environment and Climate Change Canada, National Inventory 
109  Ibid. Report 1990-2014: Greenhouse Gas Sources and Sinks in Canada.
REDUCING METHANE EMISSIONS FROM ENTERIC FERMENTATION 
Enteric fermentation is a natural process that occurs in the digestion of feed by livestock. The digestion 
process is not 100% efficient and releases methane as a by-product.  In Canada, GHG emissions from 
enteric fermentation were 25 Mt CO e in 2014 down from 31 Mt in 2005. Dairy and beef cattle produce 
2
around 95% of these emissions while others ruminants such as buffalo, goats, horses, sheep and swine, 
make up the rest of the emissions. 
There are a number of options to reduce methane emissions from enteric fermentation but many of 
these are still in the research phase. Since the demand for meat and milk is expected to increase in 
the future, decreasing methane output per unit or animal is important. For example, it is possible to 
select lower-methane producing animals through consideration of genetic characteristics. In addition, 
research into methane vaccines and inhibitors is ongoing in some jurisdictions. 
High quality feed could lead to more efficient digestion and reduce emissions.  For example, research 
has shown that mixing seaweed in cattle feed could reduce methane emissions. In this respect, a 
company from Prince Edward Island, North Atlantic Organics Ltd., is proposing organic seaweed 
products that can be used by dairy cattle.112 The use of seaweed for animal feed is in fact a traditional 
method that has been used by coastal farmers in the past.
112   NAO organics. http://www.naorganics.com/index.asp
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 63options have also allowed reduced reliance on  Mitigation options aimed at enhancing fertilizer use 
summer fallow (the practice of allowing land to lie  efficiency and reducing methane emissions from 
idle during the growing season).  livestock are promising as innovative technologies 
such as methane inhibitor feeding additives, livestock 
As a result, agricultural soils in Canada have been a  genetics, smart-fertilizers, and precision agriculture 
net sink of carbon since 2000 and will remain so over  approaches are being developed.
the long-term, although the rate at which carbon 
will be sequestered is projected to slowly diminish.  Encouraging the continued adoption of nutrient 
Greater use of cover crops, biochar application and  management practices, such as soil nutrient testing, 
the use of precision agriculture to avoid disturbance  optimisation of the timing of fertilizer application, 
of more fragile soils, among other sustainable land  incorporation of solid and liquid manure and fertilizer, 
management practices, will help maintain the  and increased manure storage capacity, will 
agricultural carbon sink in the future. continue to increase performance while minimising 
emissions in the sector.113 For example, in the beef 
cattle sector, Canadian farmers have made 
7 4  Promoting the adoption of existing and 
significant improvements in feeding and breeding 
emerging technologies and management 
practices, and as a result, cattle reach slaughter 
practices could increase efficiency and 
weight sooner, and spend fewer days eating, 
reduce emissions from crop and livestock 
ruminating, producing methane, and  
systems 
generating manure.114
On-farm GHG emissions are closely tied to 
In the livestock sector, upcoming methods to reduce 
management practices and technologies such as 
methane emissions are showing significant potential. 
fertilizer types and application methods, manure 
storage and spreading methods, land management 
113  Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Farm Environmental 
and tillage regimes, feeding and nutrition, as well as  Management Survey 2011.
114  Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Environmental Sustainability 
crop and animal genetics. 
of Canadian Agriculture: Agri-Environmental Indicator Report 
Series – Report #4.
Figure 14: Agricultural GHG emissions in Canada in 2011
The arrow length is proportional to the magnitude of the emissions; arrow direction upwards indicates a source and downwards indicates 
a sink. Source: Environmental Sustainability of Canadian Agriculture: Agri-Environmental Indicator Report Series – Report #4
64 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYThese include switching to lower-methane producing  significantly lower the rate in which the agriculture 
ruminants, methane inhibitors and feed supplements,  sector emits GHG emissions. The province notes 
or even vaccines to reduce methane production in  that the role of innovation and increased research 
the rumen.  in mitigation options for the agriculture sector is 
critical due to the challenge represented by a global 
Technology will also continue to make a profound  population growth and the subsequent pressure on 
impact on agricultural production. Bioengineering,  global food demand and production.
precision agriculture, sensors, robotics, and 
automated data capture and transfer, all hold 
7 5  The Agriculture sector has the potential to 
promise for further agriculture GHG emission 
provide renewable energy solutions and 
reductions. Although additional scientific validation 
bio-products to help reduce emissions in 
work is still needed, preliminary, partial results point 
other sectors  In evaluating these options, 
to substantial reductions in nitrous oxide emissions 
consideration should be given to the full 
when an optimised nutrient management approach 
life-cycle environmental costs  
is adopted.
and benefits.  
Continuing to seek improvements in efficiencies 
From a life cycle perspective, the agriculture  
can yield further emission reductions but this will 
sector could also contribute to long-term mitigation 
depend on the development and deployment of 
by helping to reduce emissions in other sectors 
transformative technologies (e.g., methane inhibitors 
through displacement of more emission-intensive 
and smart-fertilizers), some expected to be ready for 
materials and fossil fuels with biomass-based energy 
commercial deployment over the short-term (i.e., 5 
and products.
years) while others could possibly be made available 
over the medium-term (i.e., 10-15 years).
There is an opportunity to convert growing 
agricultural waste, as well as agricultural by- and co-
On the farm inputs side, deeper penetration of 
products into eco-efficient, bio-based products with 
precision agriculture practices, technologies and 
direct benefits for the environment, the economy, 
equipment should translate into lower consumption 
and consumers, for example, sustainable bio-energy, 
of production factors such as fertilizers and fuels, 
bio-fertilizers and bio-chemicals. Both feedstock and 
with a corresponding decrease in the GHG emissions 
technology exists to convert more wastes, agriculture 
associated with the use of these inputs. More efficient 
and forest biomass into high quality, low GHG-
and precise production decisions should also lessen 
emitting biofuels, for use in road transportation  
the pressure on natural resources like land and water.
to air travel.
As a more specific example, the province of 
In evaluating these options, consideration should  
Saskatchewan highlights the underdeveloped use of 
be given to net GHG savings along the full life  
pulse crops to mitigate the use of fertilizers, as well as 
cycle, as well as to other environmental impacts,  
the potential associated with seeding marginal land 
that could result from the intensification of 
for carbon sequestration, through permanent covers 
agricultural production.
like legumes, or by converting them into forest stands. 
The province is also hopeful that advances in beef 
genetic selection, genomics and food additives will   
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 658  Waste 
KEY MESSAGES:
•  The waste sector directly accounts for 3% of Canada’s GHG emissions; 
however from a life cycle perspective, waste related activities are 
responsible for significant indirect GHG emissions from various sectors of 
the economy not typically associate with waste. 
•  Currently, the relatively low cost of waste disposal at landfills in many  
parts of Canada provides a disincentive for waste prevention and 
diversion activities. 
•  Effective management strategies, focusing on waste prevention  
and diversion, can bring deep cuts in direct and indirect waste-related 
GHG emissions.
•  New policies could instigate behavioral change away from wasteful 
consumption patterns, as well as shift the responsibility for end-of-life 
management of products from consumers to producers.
•  Co-benefits of waste prevention, diversion, and landfill gas capture 
include: greater food security, increased supply of renewable natural 
gas and electricity, creation of a soil amendment (i.e., compost); and a 
reduction in volatile organic compounds emissions, smog formation and 
unpleasant odours.
•  In the future, progress in landfill gas capture and flaring technologies 
could further reduce any remaining direct landfill emissions. 
Canada has performed poorly in terms of quantity of waste generated per capita 
compared to its OECD peers. At 777 kg of municipal waste generated per capita in 
2008, the average Canadian city generated more waste than any other OECD country, 
twice as much as an average Japanese city, and slightly more waste than an average 
American city (722 kg).115 While substantial efforts have been taken by municipalities and 
provinces/territories across the country, for example Nova Scotia has reduced waste 
generation to 386 kg per capita as of 2012, much more needs to be done.116  
8 1  The waste sector directly accounts for 3% of Canada’s GHG emissions, 
however from a life cycle perspective; waste related activities are 
responsible for significant indirect GHG emissions from various sectors of 
the economy not typically associate with waste  
The waste sector officially accounts for 3% of total GHG emissions and 22% of Canada’s 
total methane emissions. This includes emissions from municipal solid waste landfills, 
wood waste landfills, wastewater treatment, as well as waste discharge, incineration, 
and open burning.
115  Conference Board of Canada, Municipal Waste Generation. Note: For comparison purposes, construction, 
renovation and demolition waste were not included in the OECD definition.
116  Conference Board of Canada, Waste Generation: Provincial and Territorial Ranking. Readers should note that 
municipal waste generation per capita and waste generation per capita differs slightly, the latter being slightly 
more important.
66 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYAs the IPCC’s fourth assessment report indicates,  Facility, the first industrial scale waste to biofuels 
a life cycle approach is required to evaluate the  facility of its kind, that will help the city divert up 
emissions reductions potential for waste prevention  to 90% of residential waste from landfills, as well as 
and diversion. As such, waste management activities  produce up to 38 million litres of ethanol each year.119 
will affect GHG emissions accounted for under 
sectors such as transportation, forestry, energy 
8 3  Effective management strategies, focusing 
and industrial processes. For example, the U.S. 
on waste prevention and diversion, can 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) estimated 
bring deep cuts in direct and indirect 
that approximately 42% of total U.S. greenhouse 
waste-related GHG emissions 
gas emissions are associated with the energy used 
to produce, process, transport, and dispose of  The greatest untapped potential for GHG emissions 
commodities and food.117  Waste prevention and  reductions rests with waste prevention and diversion 
diversion strategies would therefore reduce emissions  activities (e.g., composting or anaerobic digestion). 
in other sectors.  Reducing avoidable food waste and increasing 
diversion of other organic material and recyclable 
8 2  Currently, the relatively low cost of waste  materials from landfills could procure most significant 
disposal at landfills in many parts of  emissions reductions for the sector. 
Canada provides a disincentive for waste 
In Canada, avoidable food waste is valued at $31 
prevention and diversion activities  
billion per year. Moreover, the national organics 
diversion rate stands as a low 7% of the total waste 
Waste disposal is relatively inexpensive in Canada 
stream, with the recyclable materials diversion 
compared to many peer countries. Available land 
rates standing at 16%. In total, Canada’s overall 
for waste disposal is not in short supply in Canada, 
diversion rate stand at 25%, lower than other peers 
relative to many European countries. Canadian 
jurisdictions are using a variety of policy approaches  countries such as Germany or the US.120 Nevertheless, 
to counter the low cost of landfill disposal. For  it is important to remember that some Canadian 
example, Nova Scotia, Quebec, and Prince Edward  municipalities are leading the way for diversion 
Island have implemented material disposal bans  strategies, with Halifax, Hamilton, and Sherbrooke 
from landfills (e.g., organic waste and in some  achieving total diversion rates between 40 and 
instances recyclables). Quebec and Manitoba have  60%.121  An enforced target, such as the EU’s 50% 
also instituted landfill levies to provide an incentive  diversion rate by 2020, could prove useful to engage 
for greater waste diversion and to support municipal  the different Canadian authorities in a concerted 
recycling programs.118 In 2014, the City of Edmonton  waste management effort. 122
opened its new Waste-to-Biofuels and Chemicals  119  City of Edmonton, Waste to Biofuels and Chemicals Facility.
120   Statistic Canada, Waste Management Industry Survey: Business 
117  United States Environmental Protection Agency, Opportunities to  and Government Sectors.
Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions through Materials and Land  121   Federation of Canadian Municipalities, Waste Diversion Success 
Management Practices. Stories from Canadian Municipalities.
118  Giroux Environmental Consulting, State of Waste Management  122   Ontario Waste Management Association, Rethink Waste: 
in Canada. Evolution Towards a Circular Economy.
Figure 15 - Location of Waste Prevention and Reduction in the Waste Management Hierarchy   
Source: Giroux Environment Consulting. 2014. 
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 67WASTE DIVERSION IN NOVA SCOTIA 
The province of Nova Scotia is a North American leader in waste diversion, creating significant 
environmental benefit and economic advantage. Its disposal rate is 50% lower than the Canadian 
average and continues to decrease.  
Starting in 1996 the Province implemented a strategy that included disposal bans on food and yard 
waste, some paper, plastic, metal and electronic items. 
Some other highlights of Nova Scotia’s successful and ongoing ‘circular economy approach’ to solid 
waste include:
•  Financial incentives to municipalities based upon diversion performance
•  A strong partnership with municipalities through a regional (solid waste) chairs committee
•  Effective and sustained education, enforcement, and innovation programs
•  Stewardship programs for beverage containers, tires, mercury containing products,  
and dairy containers
•  Extended producer responsibility programs for electronics, paint, and cell phones
•  Municipal commitments to implementing clear bag programs for garbage that decrease  
waste disposal by 15 to 30%
As a result, tonnes of materials that used to be wasted now contribute to Nova Scotia’s economy, 
creating jobs and reducing GHG emissions.
8 4  New policies could instigate behavioral  differential tipping fees for unsorted waste. Practices 
change away from wasteful consumption  such as keeping products for longer, reusing products, 
patterns, as well as shift the responsibility  or repairing items and spare parts that can be re-used, 
for end-of-life management of products  are amongst the many ways that need to be promoted 
from consumers to producers  and rewarded by municipalities and provinces/
territories. There are innovative solutions to reducing 
Effective policies can help increase waste diversion  food waste by connecting consumers and producers 
through source reduction, reuse, recycling,  in the food industry, such as industry and non-
composting, and anaerobic digestion. For example,  governmental organisation-led initiatives to encourage 
information and incentive programs can help shift  the sale and purchase of imperfect produce. 
public behavior to less wasteful practices by helping 
to close information gaps (e.g., public education  A significant step towards increasing diversion, and 
programs), or providing financial incentives  in turn reducing emissions associated with waste, is 
such as advance disposal fees policies. Another  to shift the responsibility for end-of-life management 
example can be found in the Swedish initiative to  of products from consumers and municipalities 
introduce a tax break for repairing activities, such  to producers. Over the past 20 years, significant 
as repairs of bicycles or appliances.  Such policies  progress on extended producer responsibility 
are instrumental in shifting consumption behaviors  programs has been made in Canada on a wide 
towards waste prevention. variety of products and materials. The next phase 
will be to implement diversion programs for complex 
The true cost of landfill disposal also needs to be  product categories such as construction, renovation, 
adequately reflected in tipping fees to account for  demolition materials, furniture, textiles and carpets.123  
loss of arable land and the creation of environmental 
liabilities. Regulatory or market-based policies could 
123   Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment, Progress 
include disposal bans, higher landfill tipping fees, and  Report on the Canada-wide Action Plan for Extended Producer 
Responsibility.
68 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYRegulations and support for producers to minimise  if not mitigated. Currently, only 36% of total methane 
material inputs, optimise reuse and recovery of  gases generated by landfills are captured, partly due 
products, and develop markets for recycled materials  to current stringency and performance standards 
will be essential.124 Extended producer responsibility  on gas capture regulations across the country. 
programs and performance-based regulations  Nevertheless, landfill gas capture technologies are 
are two policies put forward to pursue that shift.125   widely available and expected development in 
Improved systems for generators to manage  flaring, gas capture and gas utilisation technologies 
certain materials on-site instead of relying on costly  could easily increase the ongoing reduction in 
centralised infrastructure could also be further  landfill GHG emissions and produce more heat and 
explored (e.g., plastic to oil conversion, renewable  electricity. In the future, thermal treatment facilities 
natural gas recovery from organics). with energy recovery, small-landfill gas capture 
technologies or even waste mining, could become 
proven and commercially viable options in Canada.
8 5  Co-benefits of waste prevention, diversion, 
and landfill gas capture include: Greater 
food security, increased supply of 
renewable natural gas and electricity,   
creation of a soil amendment (i e , 
compost); and a reduction in volatile 
organic compounds emissions, smog 
formation and unpleasant odours 
There are many co-benefits to improve waste 
management strategies apart from reducing 
greenhouse gas emissions, in particular methane. 
Waste prevention increases food security and 
organic waste diversion can produce renewable 
biogas and/or a soil amendment. Recycling can 
save resources and energy, while limiting the amount 
of plastic discharged in the oceans. Landfill gas 
capture can also provide energy and electricity to 
municipalities and industries. In addition, cement 
manufacturers across the country have shown 
interest in using a variety of waste products (solid 
waste, carpets, wood waste, asphalt, non-recyclable 
plastics) as an alternative energy source.126 Finally, 
the reduction of volatile emissions, smog formation, 
and unpleasant odours, will provide health and 
lifestyle benefits to landfill-adjacent neighborhoods 
and communities.
8 6  In the future, progress in landfill gas 
capture and flaring technologies could 
further reduce any remaining direct  
landfill emissions.
Even with waste prevention and diversion efforts, 
it is likely that landfill disposal will still be a practice 
in some parts of Canada in 2050 and that not all 
sources of GHGs will be diverted. In addition, there 
is a lag in the decomposition of organic waste in a 
landfill such that the organic waste disposed today, 
will be the source of emissions for decades to come 
124  Giroux Environmental Consulting, State of Waste Management in 
Canada.
125  Ibid.
126  Ibid.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 699  Clean Technology Sector
As our society moves to address its environmental challenges, the clean technology 
sector has seen an increase in demand for its products and processes. Clean 
technologies are products or processes that significantly reduce environmental impacts 
of a given economic activity. This subset of the economy makes a compelling case 
for itself as it provides economic development while improving the environmental 
performance of the economy. As the world moves to deep decarbonisation, the clean 
technology sector is faced with a tremendous opportunity to produce further economic 
and social co-benefits for all Canadians.   
KEY MESSAGES:
•  The clean technology sector is growing very quickly both  
domestically and globally.
•  Utilities, equipment suppliers, and policymakers should work together 
to identify strategies for reducing deployment costs of critical clean 
technologies and barriers to adoption.
•  Further investments in RD&D and innovation in clean technology, 
combined with market pull mechanisms such as carbon pricing, will 
support Canada’s competitiveness, creating high paying jobs and 
increased exports. 
•  Innovation will result in economic and environmental spill-over effects, 
thereby increasing resource efficiency and productivity in other sectors 
and reducing other types of pollution.
•  Providing a clear and predictable signal for long-term investments and 
disclosing climate-related information will allow the market to better 
anticipate the transition to a low-carbon future.
•  Canada has confirmed its commitment to clean energy innovation by 
joining the Mission Innovation international commitment, which aims to 
accelerate innovation by doubling investments in clean energy RD&D 
across the world.
9 1  The clean technology sector is growing very quickly, both domestically 
and globally 
Recent historical performance of the clean technology sector in Canada has been very 
strong, despite a leveling off between 2013 and 2014. The sector grew at a pace of 8% 
annually between 2011 and 2013, which represents more than three times the overall 
economic growth in Canada.127 Over the same time period, global clean technology 
revenues increased by 10% annually. Employment in the clean technology sector in 
Canada has increased from 41,000 in 2012 to 55,600 in 2014, an increase of more than 
16% per year. 
Solutions from clean technology producers can help address challenges in high-
emitting sectors, providing positive economic and environmental outcomes. Investment 
opportunities in clean technology are increasing at a rapid pace. For example, the 
127   Analytica Advisors, Canadian Clean Technology Industry Report.
70 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYIEA estimates that around $1 trillion per year of  developers to most effectively advance their goals. 
incremental investment are required in renewable  Finally, sufficient investment is paramount to allowing 
energy and energy efficiency investments to keep  good technology solutions to reach the market.
the global average temperature to well below 2°C 
in 2050.128 This represents a significant opportunity for 
9 3  Further investments in RD&D and innovation 
Canadian clean technology companies to tap into 
in clean technology, combined with 
this growing market. Exports accounted for 50% of the 
market pull mechanisms such as 
clean technology sector’s revenues in 2014, meaning 
carbon pricing, will support Canada’s 
Canadian firms are positioned to benefit from 
competitiveness, creating high paying jobs 
comprehensive efforts to export unique technologies 
and increased exports  
and expertise to new and growing markets.
Clean technology is a sector that defines itself 
9 2  Utilities, equipment suppliers and  in the improvement of environmental outcomes 
policymakers should work together to  related to economic activities in a broad sense. 
identify strategies for reducing deployment  As such, it is a sector where innovation is of utmost 
costs of critical clean technologies and  importance, and therefore is very RD&D-intensive. 
barriers to adoption   RD&D can help solve environmental problems with 
current technologies, but it can also contribute to 
To advance the deployment of clean technologies  developing new clean technologies that will make 
in Canada, it will be critical to coordinate between  it easier to reduce emissions in the future. However, 
actors, in order to reduce the cost of achieving  for technologies to actually make a difference, 
emission reductions and mitigate barriers to  successful commercialisation has to take place. 
adoption. Important actors in the economy, such  For this to happen, market demand has to be there. 
as Governments and utilities can play a key role in 
The right policies and frameworks can work to 
accelerating the development and adoption of 
promote a low-carbon economy by helping to 
clean technologies. Given their financial capacity, 
address the double market failure traditionally faced 
these actors can use their purchasing power to 
by the clean technology sector. As with innovation 
demonstrate clean technologies and provide a 
spending more broadly, there is a tendency for the 
visibility that will encourage broader adoption. 
private sector to underinvest in RD&D given that the 
Canada has a strong financial sector, which it  benefits may not be fully captured by the investing 
can use as a powerful lever to encourage further  firms. As well, there is the issue of businesses not 
low-carbon development both domestically and  accounting for environmental externalities in their 
abroad. Although there are many significant low- decision-making. Existing and potential government 
cost GHG reduction opportunities in developing  policies can help address these market failures. For 
countries, barriers to investment such as higher  example, carbon pricing allows for the consideration 
perceived risk and imperfect information prevent  of GHG emissions in the final price of a product, which 
these opportunities from being realised by Canadian  provides a market value to the environmental benefits 
companies. Through its $2.65 billion climate finance  of clean technologies. 
commitment, Canada will contribute to making 
Other types of approaches, such as government 
these investments more accessible to Canadian 
procurement of clean technologies and regulations, 
companies, allowing for Canadian low-carbon 
could also increase demand for Canadian clean 
technologies to help reduce emissions at a lower cost, 
technologies. Governments will have to display 
while leading to significant export opportunities.
leadership in providing broad support for clean 
Private sector participation is of utmost importance  technologies, coordinating innovation efforts and 
at all stages of technology development. Technology  catalyzing private-sector involvement, particularly for 
developers and users are best positioned to bring  early-stage R&D. 
forward new technologies that will ultimately 
These initiatives would address an important 
succeed. Governments also need to play a role 
barrier for Canada, which has historically struggled 
in providing the appropriate incentive framework 
with demonstration and commercialisation of its 
for this to happen, as the private sector typically 
clean technologies, increasing the challenge for 
underinvests in R&D. For this to happen, there must be 
companies to export untested products. Given the 
a good alignment of policies to allow for technology 
important growth of clean technology globally, 
this would position Canada favorably in terms 
128   Hamilton T., The $36-Trillion Question.
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 71of competitiveness in this market. Canada’s 
competitiveness in the clean technology market 
“Green investment represents a major 
would bring significant benefits to Canada, such as 
opportunity for both long-term investors 
high paying jobs and significant increases in exports.
and macroeconomic policymakers seeking 
to jump-start growth.” 
9 4  Innovation will result in economic and 
environmental spill-over effects, thereby  -  Mark Carney, Governor of the Bank 
increasing resource efficiency and  of England and Chairman of the 
productivity in other sectors and reducing  G20’s Financial Stability Board
other types of pollution  
Innovation in clean technologies, whether it is a 
breakthrough technology or one that drastically  The financing of climate-related initiatives is a crucial 
improves the efficiency of an existing process, can  dimension of the climate change challenge with 
bring significant benefits to the economy as well  both a domestic and international component. 
as spill-over effects. Economic benefits of clean  Significant investments, most notably in adaptation 
technologies can take different forms, depending  measures, need to be made in order to deal with 
on the nature of the technology. If a technology  the costs of climate change, some of which may 
provides an efficiency improvement, benefits will  materialise over a long-term horizon. There are risks 
be seen as reduced input costs, while they can  and opportunities associated with these investments 
take different forms in the case of a breakthrough  that many businesses and political actors are taking 
technology. The internalisation of environmental  steps to address. For example, the insurance sector 
externalities with the help of tools such as carbon  has already been significantly exposed to climate 
pricing will ensure that technologies that reduce  change risks.130 Those risks could be physical risks, 
emissions have tangible economic benefits.  where investments can be affected by major events 
like floods or disruption of global supply chains and 
Another dimension where spill-over effects are 
could have important impacts for insurers and re-
tangible is the potential to reduce production costs 
insurers. Liability risks could also arise as investors may 
and pollution through industrial ecology. Industrial 
be subject to lawsuits for carbon damages. Finally, 
ecology is a concept that could potentially transform 
transition risks may occur as structural change in the 
the industrial sector into a highly efficient integrated 
economy drive re-pricing of assets and values  
ecosystem. Industrial ecology “seeks to emulate 
of companies.  
mature ecological systems in order to reduce 
environmental impacts through maximised efficiency  Another key aspect of tackling climate change 
of energy resource inputs and the minimisation of  risks and opportunities is to provide investors 
unutilized waste”.129 This concept promotes more  with reliable and detailed information of climate 
interconnections between industrial sectors to  change activities. Many companies, including 822 
optimise the flows of inputs and outputs from each  investors with US $95 trillion in assets, have chosen 
industry such that all industrial processes together  to disclose information on their action on climate 
minimise energy use and disposal of waste products  change through the Carbon Disclosure Project or 
to improve resource efficiency and economic  the Montréal Carbon Pledge. The Financial Stability 
competitiveness. In other words, industrial ecology  Board’s Task Force on Climate-related Financial 
allows for output perceived as non-valuable (waste  Disclosures is working to develop voluntary, consistent 
heat, wood residues, etc.) to be used as inputs by  climate-related financial risk disclosures for use by 
other companies within an industrial park,   companies in providing information to investors, 
allowing for improved competitiveness and  lenders, insurers, and other stakeholders. Such 
environmental outcomes. initiatives will allow a better understanding of the 
link between decarbonisation and the financial 
9 5  Providing a clear and predictable signal  performance of firms. Further development of similar 
for long-term investments and disclosing  initiatives could create a virtuous circle where action 
climate-related information will allow the  is encouraged and best practices are shared. This 
market to better anticipate the transition to  would, in turn, provide a clear and predictable 
a low-carbon future 
129  McKinley A., Industrial Ecology: A Review with Examples  
from the Canadian Mining Industry, Canadian Journal of  130  Bank of England, Breaking the Tragedy of The Horizon - Climate 
Regional Science. Change and Financial Stability - Speech by Mark Carney.
72 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYsignal for investments, allowing the market to better  investments from governments over the next five 
anticipate the transition. 131  years, while encouraging greater levels of private-
sector investment. This commitment also entails 
Finally, pricing carbon will give Canadian businesses,  working with the Breakthrough Energy Coalition, an 
investors, and consumers a clear, predictable basis  independent initiative that features 28 influential 
for decision making. Confidence that carbon pricing  investors from 10 countries that commit to providing 
in Canada will continue to increase over time will  patient, early-stage capital (as opposed to venture 
encourage businesses and consumers to invest in  capital, which seeks returns on investment on a 
cleaner appliances, vehicles, and technology. It  much shorter time horizon) to advance clean energy 
will also encourage firms to invest in research into  technology innovation. 
low-carbon technology, which will better position 
Canadian firms to compete in the rapidly-growing,  As part of this initiative, it is recognised that clean 
low-carbon economy. technology innovation often faces a so-called 
“valley of death”, which typically appears at the 
pre-commercialisation stage, where the conversion 
9 6  Canada has confirmed its commitment 
of a proven concept into a compelling product will 
to clean energy innovation by joining 
determine whether a company will survive or not. This 
the Mission Innovation international 
commitment aims to bridge that gap with increased 
commitment, which aims to accelerate 
government funding to enable more basic research, 
innovation by doubling investments in 
as well as more patient private capital, which will 
clean energy across the world 
allow good concepts the time required to make 
On November 30, 2015, Canada announced its  it to market commercialisation. Given Canada’s 
participation in the Mission Innovation international  particular challenges in commercialisation, this 
commitment, along with 20 other countries. This  initiative could fill an important need for Canadian 
commitment is to double clean energy innovation  companies to succeed in clean energy innovation 
that can significantly reduce GHG emissions.
131   “[R]isks to financial stability will be minimised if the transition 
begins early and follows a predictable path, thereby helping the 
market anticipate the transition to a 2 degree world”.  (Bank of 
England, Breaking the Tragedy of the Horizon - Climate Change 
and Financial Stability - Speech by Mark Carney.)
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 7310  Achieving a Low-Carbon Future  
through Infrastructure Investments
Infrastructure investments are key to supporting Canada’s deep decarbonisation efforts 
over the longer term and will help reshape the economy consistent with low-carbon 
pathways. Investing in infrastructure today will provide Canadians with increased 
employment opportunities, and cleaner, more modern communities, while also addressing 
climate change and air pollution.
Investing in public transit, green infrastructure, social infrastructure, Canada’s trade and 
transportation corridors, as well as rural and northern communities, will provide a strong 
foundation for more inclusive and sustainable cities, and can also help to both address 
greenhouse gas emissions and enhance resilience to the impacts of climate change.  
For instance, Canadian communities building new urban transit networks and service 
extensions will transform the way that Canadians live, move and work.
In addition to committing significant resources (over $186 billion through to 2027-28), 
Canada is also establishing a new Infrastructure Bank, an arm’s-length organization 
dedicated to increasing investment in growth-oriented infrastructure, transforming the way 
infrastructure is planned, funded and delivered across the country.  
Considering the magnitude of investments required to develop key infrastructure projects, key 
linkages between infrastructure decision-making and long-term decarbonisation include:
•  Investments are influential in setting long-term greenhouse gas pathways as the 
lifespan of infrastructure assets are long-lived, often ranging from 25 to 60 years. 
•  Once infrastructure investments are made, the behaviours and carbon emissions 
associated with infrastructure investments are more or less ‘locked-in’ and the shift to 
a new pathway can become very costly.
•  Deploying infrastructure investments strategically can attract low-carbon infrastructure 
investments, creating a critical mass of funding for low-carbon solutions or the ability to 
‘anchor’ future low-carbon investments. For example, making strategic investments in 
alternative fuel or electric vehicle infrastructure would underpin further investments in 
low-carbon vehicles.
•  The transformative nature of infrastructure projects plays a complementary and 
enabling role to support the transition to a low-carbon economy. For instance, 
infrastructure that is designed to withstand the projected impacts of climate change 
can lead to cost savings over the longer term by avoiding maintenance and 
rehabilitation costs. 
Canada is committed to working closely with all stakeholders, including provinces, 
territories and Indigenous peoples, to develop and implement an infrastructure plan 
that delivers investments across the country. As part of this plan, investments in green 
infrastructure and other streams, such as social and transportation, will reduce GHG 
emissions and support the resilience of infrastructure assets. Examples may include 
supporting further electrification of sectors currently reliant on fossil fuels, improving 
electricity transmission systems through inter-provincial transmission lines and the expansion 
of smart grids.
Investments in sustainable infrastructure will enable greater climate change adaptation 
and resilience; ensure that more communities can provide clean air and safe drinking 
water for their citizens; and support the transition toward more sustainable economic 
growth. Canada will ensure that our mid-century climate change objectives inform our 
infrastructure development going forward.
74 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYConclusion 
Dealing with climate change will ultimately require net-zero anthropogenic greenhouse 
gas emissions over the course of this century. Canada will need to fundamentally 
transform all economic sectors, especially patterns of energy production and 
consumption. Over time, this requires major structural changes to the economy and the 
way people live, work, and consume.
A low-greenhouse gas future also represents a massive opportunity to increase 
prosperity and the well-being of Canadians, to improve the livability of the built 
environment, modernise transportation, and enhance the natural environment. The 
benefits include: reducing air pollution and congestion, modernising infrastructure 
to provide more inclusive and sustainable cities, creating cleaner and more modern 
communities, growing Canada’s clean technology sector, increasing economic 
productivity and efficiency, saving energy and reducing energy costs, and enhancing 
resilience to the impacts of climate change.
Much of the transformation can be achieved with existing technology, but innovation, 
such as through the Mission Innovation initiative, and significant investments in research, 
development, demonstration & deployment, and related infrastructure, will be 
fundamental to the transition.
Additional collaboration across industry leaders to identify common innovation 
priorities will be needed to seize opportunities to integrate innovation into business 
strategies. Funding environments, intellectual property regimes, research agendas, and 
communication strategies will need to be shaped to stimulate innovation investments. 
Decarbonisation will require a sustained societal effort that will take many years 
to accomplish. This will require a technological ramp up of low greenhouse gas 
alternatives, and also societal engagement and action by all Canadians. Working 
collaboratively with Indigenous peoples by supporting their on-going implementation 
of climate change initiatives will be key. Likewise, all levels of government will need to 
implement a vast array of the various policy options that are available to them. In this 
respect, Canada will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories 
including through the pan-Canadian framework on clean growth and climate change. 
Although the pace of this transition may vary from Canadian jurisdiction to jurisdiction, 
the direction and orientation are clear. 
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 75Reference List
Reports:
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. (2016). Environmental Sustainability of Canadian Agriculture: Agri-
Environmental Indicator Report Series – Report #4. Retrieved from 
http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/science-and-innovation/agricultural-practices/environmental-sustainability-of-
canadian-agriculture-agri-environmental-indicator-report-series-report-4/?id=1467307820931
Analytica Advisors. (2016). 2016 Canadian Clean Technology Industry Report. Retrieved from http://www.
analytica-advisors.com/publications
Association of American Railroads. (2016). Freight Railroads Help Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions. Retrieved 
from https://www.aar.org/BackgroundPapers/Railroads%20and%20Greenhouse%20Gas%20Emissions.pdf
Bataille, C. et al. (2015). Pathways to Deep Decarbonization in Canada. Retrieved from 
http://deepdecarbonization.org/wp-content/uploads/2015/09/DDPP_CAN.pdf  
Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment. (2014). Progress Report on the Canada-wide Action Plan for 
Extended Producer Responsibility. Retrieved from http://www.ccme.ca/files/Resources/waste/extended/CAP-
EPR%20Progress%20Report.pdf 
Canadian Council on Renewable Electricity. (2015). Powering Prosperity Climate Report.http://
renewableelectricity.ca/wpcontent/uploads/2015/11/CanCORE_Report_FINAL.pdf
Carleton University School of Public Policy and Administration. (2015). Report of the State of Alternative Energy in 
the Arctic. Retrieved from 
https://curve.carleton.ca/system/files/faculty_staff_research_publication/08515c6b-3b39-4c41-ad7b-
2c6306cf0379/fac_staff_res_pub_pdf/d9833b6ff19ff098e44032a87026605f/cherniak-etal-alternativeenergyarctic.
pdf
Conference Board of Canada. (2008). Municipal Waste Generation. Retrieved from http://www.
conferenceboard.ca/hcp/details/environment/municipal-waste-generation.aspx 
Conference Board of Canada. (2011). Canada’s Electricity Infrastructure: Building a Case for Investment. 
Retrieved from http://www.conferenceboard.ca/e-library/abstract.aspx?DID=4132
Conference Board of Canada. (2012). Waste Generation: Provincial and Territorial Ranking. Retrieved from http://
www.conferenceboard.ca/hcp/provincial/environment/waste.aspx 
Conference Board of Canada. (2015). A Long, Hard Road: Reducing GHG Emissions in Canada’s Road 
Transportation Sector by 2050. Retrieved from 
http://www.conferenceboard.ca/e-library/abstract.aspx?did=7491
Council of Canadian Academies. (2015). Technology and Policy Options for a Low-Emission Energy System in 
Canada. Retrieved from 
http://www.scienceadvice.ca/uploads/eng/assessments%20and%20publications%20and%20news%20releases/
magna/energyuse_fullreport_en.pdf 
Energy Economics. (2010). Optimizing the Energy Efficiency of Conventional Multi-Cylinder Dryers in the Paper 
Industry.
Environment and Climate Change Canada. (2014). Canada’s Emission Trends Report 2014. Retrieved from https://
www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg/default.asp?lang=En&n=E0533893-1 
Environment and Climate Change Canada. (2015). Technical Guidance on Reporting Greenhouse 
Gas Emissions. Retrieved from http://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg/default.asp?lang=En&n=47B640C5-
1&printfullpage=true#ws800EC2BC
76 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYEnvironment and Climate Change Canada. (2016). Canada’s Second Biennial Report on Climate Change. 
Retrieved from https://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg/default.asp?lang=En&n=02D095CB-1 
Environment and Climate Change Canada. (2016). National Inventory Report 1990-2014: Greenhouse Gas 
Sources and Sinks in Canada. Retrieved from https://www.ec.gc.ca/ges-ghg/default.asp?lang=En&n=662F9C56-1
Executive Office of the President of the United States. (2014). The Cost of Delaying Action to Stem Climate 
Change. Retrieved from https://www.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/docs/the_cost_of_delaying_action_to_
stem_climate_change.pdf 
Federation of Canadian Municipalities. (2009). Waste Diversion Success Stories from Canadian Municipalities. 
Retrieved from https://www.fcm.ca/Documents/tools/GMF/Getting_to_50_percent_en.pdf
GE Consulting group. (2016). Pan-Canadian Wind Integration Study, Retrieved from 
http://canwea.ca/wind-energy/wind-integration-study/
German Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology. (2012). Germany’s New Energy Policy Heading Towards 
2050 With Secure, Affordable And Environmentally Sound Energy. Retrieved from  
http://www.bmwi.de/English/Redaktion/Pdf/germanys-new-energy-policy
Giroux Environmental Consulting. (2014). State of Waste Management in Canada. 
http://www.ccme.ca/files/Resources/waste/wst_mgmt/State_Waste_Mgmt_in_Canada%20April%202015%20
revised.pdf
Glancy, R.P. (2013). Quantifying Fugitive Emission Factors from Unconventional Natural Gas Production Using IPCC 
Methodologies. IGES, Hayama, Japan. Retrieved from  
http://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/tsu/intern_report/TSU_InternshipReportRyan.pdf
Global Commission on the Economy and Climate. (2016). The Sustainable Infrastructure Imperative: Financing for 
Better Growth and Development. Retrieved from  
http://newclimateeconomy.report/2016/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2014/08/NCE_2016Report.pdf 
Government of British Columbia. (2008). Greening the Border. Retrieved from 
http://www.th.gov.bc.ca/greening_the_border/docs/greening_the_border.pdf
Government of Canada. (2011). Status of Remote/Off-Grid Communities in Canada. Retrieved from 
http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/sites/www.nrcan.gc.ca/files/canmetenergy/files/pubs/2013-118_en.pdf
Government of Canada. (2016). Indigenous Peoples and Forestry in Canada. Retrieved from 
http://publications.gc.ca/collections/collection_2016/rncan-nrcan/Fo4-58-2016-eng.pdf
Government of Canada. (2016). Shrinking the Environmental Footprint – Beginning with Government. Retrieved 
from https://www.canada.ca/en/services/environment/conservation/sustainability/federal-sustainable-
development-strategy/2015-progress-report/environmental-footprint.html
ICF International. (2014). Economic Analysis of Methane Emission Reduction Opportunities in the U.S. Onshore Oil 
and Natural Gas Industries. Retrieved from  
https://www.edf.org/sites/default/files/methane_cost_curve_report.pdf
International Energy Agency. (2009). Energy Technology Transitions for Industry: Energy Technology Transitions for 
Industry. Retrieved from https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/industry2009.pdf  
International Energy Agency. (2000). Abatement of other Greenhouse Gases – Nitrous Oxide. Retrieved from 
http://www.ieaghg.org/docs/General_Docs/Reports/PH3-29%20nitrous%20oxide.pdf 
International Energy Agency. (2015). Energy Efficiency Market Report. Retrieved from 
https://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/energy-efficiency-market-report-2015-.html
International Energy Agency. (2016). Energy Policies of IEA countries: Canada Review 2015. Retrieved from 
http://www.iea.org/publications/freepublications/publication/EnergyPoliciesofIEACountriesCanada2015Review.
pdf
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 77International Energy Agency. (2016). Energy Technology Perspectives 2016. Retrieved from 
http://www.iea.org/bookshop/719-Energy_Technology_Perspectives_2016
International Energy Association. (2016). IEA’s Electricity Information Report. Retrieved from 
http://www.iea.org/bookshop/727-Electricity_Information_2016
Jacobson, M. Z. et al. (2016). 100% Clean and Renewable Wind, Water, and Sunlight (WWS) All-Sector Energy 
Roadmaps for 139 Countries of the World. Retrieved from 
http://web.stanford.edu/group/efmh/jacobson/Articles/I/WWS-50-USState-plans.html
National Energy Board. (2015). Electricity Exports and Imports Summary. Retrieved from 
https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/nrg/sttstc/lctrct/stt/lctrctysmmr/2015/smmry2015-eng.html
National Energy Board. (2016). Canada’s Energy Future 2016: Energy Supply and Demand Projections to 2040, 
Retrieved from https://www.neb-one.gc.ca/nrg/ntgrtd/ftr/2016/index-eng.html
National Research Council Canada. (2016). Revolutionizing Canada’s Mining Industry with Electric Vehicles. 
Retrieved from http://www.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/eng/irap/success/2016/papabravo.html
National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy. (2007). Getting to 2050: Canada’s Transition to a 
Low-emission Future. Retrieved from 
http://publications.gc.ca/site/eng/325043/publication.html
National Round Table on the Environment and the Economy. (2008). Getting to 2050: Canada’s Transition to a 
low-emission Future. Retrieved from http://nrt-trn.ca/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/Getting-to-2050-low-res.pdf
Natural Resources Canada. (2010). Commissioning Guide for New Buildings. Retrieved from 
http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/efficiency/buildings/research/optimization/3827
Natural Resources Canada. (2015). The State of Canada’s Forests 2015. Retrieved from 
http://cfs.nrcan.gc.ca/pubwarehouse/pdfs/36553.pdf 
Natural Resources Canada. (2015), Coming to Terms with Heat Pumps. Retrieved from  
http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/publications/efficiency/heating-heat-pump/6829 
Natural Resources Canada. (2016). Aboriginal Participation in the Forest Sector. Retrieved from 
http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/forests/canada/aboriginal/16515
Natural Resources Canada. (2016). The Energy Innovation Program: Clean Energy Innovation. Retrieved from 
http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/science/programs-funding/18876
Natural Resources Canada. (2016). Improving Energy Efficiency in Canada. Retrieved from 
http://oee.nrcan.gc.ca/publications/statistics/parliament/2013-2015/pdf/parliament13-15.pdf
Navius Research Inc. (2012). Investment and Lock-In Analysis for Canada: Low Carbon Scenarios to 2050. 
Retrieved from http://warming.apps01.yorku.ca/library/wp-content/uploads/2013/03/NRTEE-2012-Investment-and-
Lock-in-Analysis-for-Canada_Low-Carbon-Scenarios-to-2050-CP6.pdf 
Ontario Waste Management Association. (2015). Rethink Waste: Evolution Towards a Circular Economy. Retrieved 
from http://www.owma.org/Publications/OWMAReportsandPolicies.aspx
Potvin, C. et al. (2015). Acting on Climate Change – Solutions from Canadian Scholars. Retrieved from 
http://www.sustainablecanadadialogues.ca/files/PDF_DOCS/SDC_EN_30marchlr.pdf
Professional Engineers Ontario. (2010). Towards a Clean Train Policy: Diesel Versus Electric. Retrieved from http://
www.academia.edu/5399500/Toward_a_clean_train_policy_diesel_versus_electric
Torrie, R. (2015). Acting on Climate Change: Extending the Dialogue Among Canadians: Some Reflections On 
Climate Change Response Policy. Retrieved from  
http://sustainablecanadadialogues.ca/pdf_2015/extending_dialogue/RalphTorrie.corr.pdf
78 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYScurr, C. and Beaudry, J. (2011). Gap Analysis First Nations Climate Change Adaptation South of 60 Degrees 
Latitude. Submitted To: Indian and Northern Affairs Canada. 
Shell Global. (2016). A Better Life with a Healthy Planet: Pathways to net-zero emissions. 
Retrieved from http://www.shell.com/energy-and-innovation/the-energy-future/scenarios/
a-better-life-with-a-healthy-planet/_jcr_content/par/textimage.stream/1475857466913/
a1aa5660d50ab79942f7e4a629fcb37ab93d021afb308b92c1b77696ce6b2ba6/scenarios-nze-brochure-interactive-
afwv9-interactive.pdf
Smart Prosperity. (2016). New Thinking – Canada’s Roadmap to Smart Prosperity. Retrieved from  
http://institute.smartprosperity.ca/sites/default/files/newthinking.pdf 
Statistics Canada. (2010). Waste Management Industry Survey: Business and Government Sectors.  
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/16f0023x/2010001/part-partie1-eng.htm
Statistics Canada. (2011). Census of Agriculture. Retrieved from http://www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/ca2011/index
Statistics Canada. (2013). Farm Environmental Management Survey 2011. Retrieved from  
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/21-023-x/21-023-x2013001-eng.htm
Sustainable Canadian Dialogue. (2016). Acting on Climate Change : Indigenous Innovation. Retrieved from  
http://www.sustainablecanadadialogues.ca/en/scd/indigenousinnovations
Swiss Re and Institute of International Finance. (2015). Infrastructure investing: It matters. Retrieved from http://
www.swissre.com/rethinking/financial_stability/infrastructure_investing_it_matters.html
The Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors. (2005). Green Value. Retrieved from 
http://hatchdesign.ca/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2011/12/greenvaluereport1.pdf
Trottier Energy Futures Project. (2016). Canada’s Challenge & Opportunity. Retrieved from   
http://iet.polymtl.ca/tefp/
United Nations Environment Programme. (2015). Emissions Gap Report. Retrieved from 
http://www.unep.org/publications/ebooks/emissionsgapreport/ 
United Nations Environment Programme and World Meteorological Organization. (2011). Integrated Assessment of 
Black Carbon and Tropospheric Ozone. http://www.unep.org/dewa/Portals/67/pdf/BlackCarbon_report.pdf
United States Energy Information Administration. (2016). Levelized Cost and Levelized Avoided Cost of New 
Generation Ressources in the Annual Energy Outlook 2016. Retrieved from  
https://www.eia.gov/forecasts/aeo/electricity_generation.cfm 
United States Environmental Protection Agency. (2009). Opportunities to Reduce Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
through Materials and Land Management Practices. Retrieved from 
https://www3.epa.gov/region9/climatechange/pdfs/ghg-land-materials-management.pdf
Urban Transportation Task Force. (2012). The High Cost of Congestion in Canadian Cities. Retrieved from  
http://www.comt.ca/english/uttf-congestion-2012.pdf
World Bank Group. (2016). Zero Routine Flaring by 2030. Retrieved from 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/zero-routine-flaring-by-2030
World Energy Council. (2010). Average Electricity Consumption per Electrified Household. Retrieved from  
https://www.wec-indicators.enerdata.eu/household-electricity-use.html
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 79Websites:
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. (2016). An Overview of the Canadian Agriculture and Agri-Food System. 
Retrieved from http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/about-us/publications/economic-publications/alphabetical-listing/an-
overview-of-the-canadian-agriculture-and-agri-food-system-2016/?id=1462288050282
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. (2016). Nitrous oxide. Retrieved from http://www.agr.gc.ca/eng/science-and-
inovation/agricultural-practices/agriculture-and-climate/greenhouse-gases/nitrous-oxide/?id=1329321974453
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. (2011). Farm Environmental Management Survey 2011. Retrieved from  
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/21-023-x/21-023-x2013001-eng.htm
CAA. (n.d.). Electric Vehicles, What You Need to Know. Retrieved from 
http://electricvehicles.caa.ca/electric-vehicles-available-in-canada/ 
City of Edmonton. (n.d.). On the Front Edge of Smart Vehicle Technology. Retrieved from  
http://www.edmonton.ca/city_government/initiatives_innovation/smart-vehicle-technology.aspx 
City of Edmonton. (n.d.). Waste to Biofuels and Chemicals Facility. Retrieved from 
https://www.edmonton.ca/programs_services/garbage_waste/biofuels-facility.aspx 
Drake Landing Solar Community. (n.d.). Welcome to Drake Landing Solar Community. Retrieved from  
http://www.dlsc.ca/ 
Electricity. (n.d.). The Electric Bus – Quiet, Exhaust Emission-Free and Passenger-Friendly. Retrieved from  
http://www.goteborgelectricity.se/en/node/19505/about-electric-bus/ 
Equiterre. (n.d.). Family Farmers Network. Retrieved from  
http://www.equiterre.org/en/project/family-farmers-network/ 
EVObsession. (2015). Best Electric Car for the Average American. Retrieved from 
http://evobsession.com/best-electric-car-for-the-average-american/ 
Fleet Carma. (2015). Electric Vehicle Sales in Canada: 2015 Final Numbers. Retrieved from  
http://www.fleetcarma.com/ev-sales-canada-2015/
Force. (n.d.). FORCE. Retrieved from http://fundyforce.ca/about/ 
Indigenous Economic Development Indigenous Affairs Working Group. (n.d.). Ontario Aboriginal Energy 
Partnerships Program. Retrieved from 
http://www.aawgecdev.ca/ontario-aboriginal-energy-partnerships-program.html 
Mercedes-Benz. (2016). Electric truck for the city. Retrieved from  
https://www.mercedes-benz.com/en/mercedes-benz/next/e-mobility/electric-truck-for-the-city/ 
Mercedes-Benz (2016). Urban eTruck [Digital Image]. Daimler Co. Ltd. Retrieved from  
https://www.daimler.com/products/trucks/mercedes-benz/urban-etruck.html 
Model 3 Tracker (2016) Known Spots of Model 3 Vehicles by Status. Retrieved from 
https://www.model3tracker.info/public_graphs_world_map.php
Natural Resources Canada. (2014). Low Carbon Fuel Demonstration Pilot Plant. Retrieved from 
http://www.nrcan.gc.ca/energy/funding/current-funding-programs/eii/16134
Natural Resources Canada. (2015). Algal Carbon Conversion Program. Retrieved from 
http://www.nrc-cnrc.gc.ca/eng/solutions/collaborative/algal_index.html 
Nuclear Energy Institute. (2015). Top 10 Nuclear Generating Countries. Retrieved from http://www.nei.org/
Knowledge-Center/Nuclear-Statistics/World-Statistics/Top-10-Nuclear-Generating-Countries/ 
80 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYOrkuveita Reykjavikur. (n.d.) The CarbFix Project. Retrieved from 
https://www.or.is/english/carbfix-project#page-7214 
News Articles:
Bloomberg New Energy Finance. (2016, June). Coal and Gas to Stay Cheap, but Renewables Still Win 
Race on Costs. Bloomberg.  Retrieved from https://about.bnef.com/press-releases/coal-and-gas-to-
stay-cheap-but-renewables-still-win-race-on-costs/?utm_source=neowebsite&utm_medium=link&utm_
content=pressrelease&utm_campaign=NEO2016
Canadian Press. (2013, November). Electric Bus Pilot Project to Hit Montreal Streets in 2015. CBC News. 
Retrieved from http://www.cbc.ca/news/canada/montreal/electric-bus-pilot-project-to-hit-montreal-streets-
in-2015-1.2436725
Condon, P. (2016, January). Don’t Waste Billions on Bad Transit Projects. The Tyee. Retrieved from 
http://thetyee.ca/Opinion/2016/01/25/Bad-Transit-Projects/
Coulter, T. (2015, February). Japan Has More Car Chargers than Gas Stations. Bloomberg. Retrieved from 
http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2015-02-13/japan-has-more-car-chargers-than-gas-stations-carbon-
climate
Government of Canada. (2016, March). Reducing Methane Emissions from Canada’s Oil and Gas Industry. 
Governement of Canada News. Retrieved from http://news.gc.ca/web/article-en.do?nid=1039219
Hamilton, T. (2013, January). The $36-Trillion Question. Corporate Knights. Retrieved from  
http://www.corporateknights.com/channels/climate-and-carbon/the-36-trillion-question-13587867/
Oron, A. (2016, March). World’s Top 7 Electric Vehicle Adoption Countries for 2015. Inside EVs. Retrieved from 
http://insideevs.com/worlds-top-7-electric-vehicle-adoption-countries-for-2015/
Roston, E. and Echouse, B. (2016, July). How the Pentagon is Waging America’s Wars Using Renewable Energy. 
Financial Post. Retrieved from http://business.financialpost.com/news/energy/how-the-pentagon-is-waging-
americas-wars-using-renewable-energy?__lsa=0699-fa33
Peer Review Articles:
Bataille, C., Melton, N., and Jaccard, M. (2015). Policy Uncertainty and Diffusion of Carbon Capture and Storage 
in an Optimal Region. Climate Policy, 15(5), 565-582. Retrieved from 
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/14693062.2014.953905
Bond, T. C., et al. (2013). Bounding the Role of Black Carbon in the Climate System: A Scientific Assessment. J. 
Geophys. Res. Atmos., 118, 5380–5552. Retrieved from  
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/jgrd.50171/abstract 
McKinley, A. (2008). Industrial Ecology: A Review with Examples from the Canadian Mining Industry. Canadian 
Journal of Regional Science/Revue canadienne des sciences régionales, XXXI(1), 163-174.
Needell, Z.A, et al. (2016). Potential for Widespread Electrification of Personal Vehicle for Travel in the United 
States. Massachusetts Institute for Technology, Nature Energy. Retrieved from 
http://www.nature.com/articles/nenergy2016112 
O’Connor, J., and Bowick, M. (2014). Advancing Sustainable Design with Life Cycle Assessment. SAB Magazine. 
Retrieved from  
http://www.athenasmi.org/wpcontent/uploads/2015/09/Advancing_Sustainable_Design_with_LCA.pdf 
Smyth, C.E. et al. (2014). Quantifying the Biophysical Climate Change Mitigation Potential of Canada’s Forest 
Sector. Biogeosciences, 11, 3515-3529. 
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 81Smyth, C.E. et al. (2016). Climate Change Mitigation Potential of Local Use of Harvest Residues for Bioenergy in 
Canada. CB Bioenergy. Retrieved from http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/(ISSN)1757-1707/earlyview 
Chapters in a Book or Report:
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. (2014). Summary for policymakers. In: Climate Change 2014: 
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II 
to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. 
Dokken, K.J. Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova, B. Girma, E.S. 
Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 1-32. 
Myhre, G. et al. (2013). Anthropogenic and Natural Radiative Forcing. In: Climate Change 2013: The Physical 
Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change [Stocker, T.F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S.K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and 
P.M. Midgley (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 659–740.
Nabuurs, G.J., et al. (2007). Forestry. In: Climate Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the 
Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [B. Metz, O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, 
R. Dave, L.A. Meyer (eds)], Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA, 541-
584.
Databanks and Inventories:
Canada’s National Forest Inventory. (2013). Resources:  Statistical Summaries for Canada:  Forest Area [Data file]. 
Retrieved from https://nfi.nfis.org/resources/general/summaries/en/pdf/CA3_T4_FOR_AREA_en.pdf
Canadian Forest Service. (2016). Satellite Forest Monitoring in Canada [Data file]. Retrieved from 
http://forests.foundryspatial.com 
Canadian Industrial Energy End-Use Data and Analysis Centre (2015). Cogeneration Facilities in Canada 2014 
[Data file]. Retrieved from http://www2.cieedac.sfu.ca/media/publications/Cogeneration_Report_2015_Final.pdf
Natural Resources Canada. (2013). Remote Communities Database [Data file]. Retrieved from 
http://www2.nrcan.gc.ca/eneene/sources/rcd-bce/index.cfm?fuseaction=admin.home1&new=true
Statistics Canada (2011). Households and the Environment: Energy Use (11-526-S) [Data file]. Retrieved from  
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/pub/11-526-s/11-526-s2013002-eng.htm 
Statistics Canada (2012). 2011 Census of Agriculture [Data file]. Retrieved from  
http://www.statcan.gc.ca/eng/ca2011/index
Regulations, Treaties, Laws & Directives:
Directive 2012/27/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 on Energy Efficiency 
Amending Directives 2009/125/EC and 2010/30/EU and Repealing Directives 2004/8/EC and 2006/32/EC, 2012 O.J. 
L 315/1. Retrieved from http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2012:315:0001:0056:en:PDF
Environmental Protection Agency. (2010). NSPS OOOOa Technical Support Document. 40 CFR 60. 2010. Retrieved 
from https://www.regulations.gov/document?D=EPA-HQ-OAR-2010-0505-5021
UNFCCC. (2015). Adoption of the Paris Agreement. Dec. 12, 2015, UNTS, FCCC/CP/2015/L.9/Rev.1
Speeches:
Bank of England (2015). Breaking  the Tragedy of the Horizon - Climate Change and Financial Stability. Bank of 
England Publications.  Retrieved from  
http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Pages/speeches/2015/844.aspx
82 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYAnnex 1: Detailed Modelling Results from 2050 Scenarios
This annex provides modelling results for the aggregate energy economy or total economy of Canada under the 
described low greenhouse gas modelling analyses (see model and scenario descriptions in Chapter 3). The tables 
are provided for illustrative purposes only and should not be interpreted as optimal pathways. Moreover, the 
sectoral aggregation may differ from one model to another.
The table below illustrates results from ECCC’s modelling, where a 2050 target of 80% below 2005 levels is 
achieved by reductions in emissions from the energy sector, industrial processes, agriculture and waste. The 
reductions are influenced by a common price on greenhouse gas emissions.
As illustrated by the table, the greatest emissions reductions are projected to come from energy-related 
emissions (89% below the 2005 level), followed by emissions from waste (55% below the 2005 level), industrial 
process emission (50% below the 2005 level) and agriculture (36% below the 2005 level). As there are currently 
relatively few moderate cost reduction opportunities for industrial process sector, a project reduction in output 
drives the decline in emissions.
Table A1: Environment and Climate Change Canada - Gross Emissions (2050) 
Canada’s 1990−2050 GHG Emissions by Sector (Mt CO e)
2
Greenhouse Gas Categories 1990 2005 2050 % Change 
Relative to 2005
TOTAL: EXCLUDING LULUCF 613 748 149 -80%
ENERGY 482 597 67 -89%
Stationary Combustion Sources 285 342 46
Transport 148 195 38
Fugitive Sources 49 61 6
CO Capture, Transport and Storage  - 0 -23
2
INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES AND PRODUCT USE 56 58 29 -50%
Mineral Products 8 10 2
Chemical Industry 17 10 19
Metal Production 24 20 5
Production and Consumption of Halocarbons,  1 6 1
SF and NF
6 3
Non-Energy Products from Fuels and Solvent Use 5 12 2
Other Product Manufacture and Use 0 1 0
AGRICULTURE 49 61 39 -36%
Enteric Fermentation 23 31 20
Manure Management 8 10 6
Agriculture Soils 17 19 12
Field Burning of Agricultural Residues 0 0 0
Liming, Urea Application and Other   1 1 0
Carbon-containing Fertilizers
WASTE 26 31 14 -55%
Solid Waste Disposal   24 28 13
Biological Treatment of Solid Waste 1 1 1
Wastewater Treatment and Discharge 1 1 0
Incineration and Open Burning of Waste 1 1 0
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 83The table below illustrates results from ECCC’s modelling of a scenario in which a 2050 target of 80% below 
2005 levels is achieved by a 65% reduction in the combined emissions of the energy sector, industrial processes, 
agriculture, and waste, plus an assumed contribution from credits due to improved land sector sequestration 
and internationally transferred mitigation outcomes. 
As depicted in the table, the greatest reductions are projected to come from energy-related emissions 
(74% below the 2005 level), followed by emissions from waste (55% below the 2005 level), industrial process 
emission (28% below the 2005 level) and agriculture (15% below the 2005 level). 
Table A2: Environment and Climate Change Canada-Net Emissions (2050) 
Canada’s 1990−2050 GHG Emissions by Sector (Mt CO e)
2
Greenhouse Gas Categories 1990 2005 2050 % Change 
Relative to 2005
TOTAL: EXCLUDING LULUCF 613 748 262 -65%
ENERGY 482 597 155 -74%
Stationary Combustion Sources 285 342 86
Transport 148 195 77
Fugitive Sources 49 61 8
CO  Capture, Transport and Storage  - 0 -17
2
INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES AND PRODUCT USE 56 58 50 -15%
Mineral Products 8 10 4
Chemical Industry 17 10 28
Metal Production 24 20 12
Production and Consumption of Halocarbons,  1 6 2
SF and NF
6 3
Non-Energy Products from Fuels and Solvent Use 5 12 4
Other Product Manufacture and Use 0 1 0
AGRICULTURE 49 61 44 -28%
Enteric Fermentation 23 31 23
Manure Management 8 10 7
Agriculture Soils 17 19 14
Field Burning of Agricultural Residues 0 0 0
Liming, Urea Application and Other Carbon- 1 1 1
containing Fertilizers
WASTE 26 31 14 -55%
Solid Waste Disposal   24 28 13
Biological Treatment of Solid Waste 1 1 1
Wastewater Treatment and Discharge   1 1 0
Incineration and Open Burning of Waste   1 1 0
84 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYThe table below illustrates modelling results from Trottier Energy Futures Project, where a 2050 target of 60% 
below the 1990 levels is achieved by reductions in emissions from the energy sector, industrial processes, 
agriculture and wastes. The table below illustrated the reductions when current technologies are available, with 
the addition of interprovincial interconnections to the electricity grid.
As illustrated by the table, the greatest reductions are projected to come from electricity emissions (99% below 
the 2015 level), followed by emissions from the residential sector (87% below the 2015 level), commercial 
emissions (76% below the 2015 level), transportation (71% below the 2015 level) and agriculture (64% below the 
2005 level).
Table A3: Trottier Energy Futures Project (Current Technology Scenario)
Canada’s 1990−2050 GHG Emissions by Sector (Trottier) Mt CO e
2
Greenhouse Gas Categories 2015 2050 % Change Relative to 2015
CURRENT TECHNOLOGY SCENARIO:  
TOTAL (EXCLUDING PROCESS EMISSIONS) 488 171 -65%
TOTAL (INCLUDING PROCESS EMISSIONS) 560 282 -50%
AGRICULTURE 16 6 -64%
COMMERCIAL 36 9 -76%
INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES AND PRODUCT USE 53 35 -34%
RESIDENTIAL 43 6 -87%
TRANSPORTATION 169 49 -71%
ELECTRICITY 60 0 -99%
SUPPLY - COMBUSTION 112 66 -41%
SUPPLY – PROCESS 71 112 56%
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 85The table below is also from the Trottier Energy Futures Project. It illustrates the reductions when other new 
technologies are available to reduce GHG emission reduction costs.  The contribution of new technologies 
increases the reduction from agriculture, commercial, residential and supply-combustion.
As illustrated by the table, the greatest reductions are projected to come from electricity emissions (99% below 
the 2015 level), followed by emissions from the residential sector (89% below the 2015 level), commercial emissions 
(88% below the 2015 level), agriculture (66% below the 2015 level) and supply process emissions (56% below the 
2005 level).
Table A4: Trottier Energy Futures Project (New Technology Scenario)
Canada’s 1990−2050 GHG Emissions by Sector (Trottier) Mt CO e
2
Greenhouse Gas Categories 2015 2050 % Change Relative to 2015
NEW TECHNOLOGY SCENARIO:  
TOTAL (EXCLUDING PROCESS EMISSIONS) 488 171 -65%
TOTAL (INCLUDING PROCESS EMISSIONS) 560 282 -50%
AGRICULTURE 16 5 -66%
COMMERCIAL 36 4 -88%
INDUSTRIAL PROCESSES AND PRODUCT USE 51 35 -32%
RESIDENTIAL 43 5 -89%
TRANSPORTATION 166 76 -54%
ELECTRICITY 64 0 -99%
SUPPLY - COMBUSTION 113 45 -60%
SUPPLY - PROCESS 71 112 56%
86 CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYThe table below illustrates modelling results from DDPP Study, where a 2050 target of 88% below the 2015 levels 
is achieved by reductions in emissions from all sectors of the economy except for agriculture, which was not 
included as part of this modelling work. 
As illustrated by the table, the greatest reductions are projected to come from residential and commercial 
buildings emissions (99% below the 2015 level), followed by emissions from the personal transportation sector  
(97% below the 2015 level), freight transportation emissions (95% below the 2015 level), industrial minerals  
(93% below the 2015 level) and chemical products (75% below the 2005 level).
Table A5: Deep Decarbonization Pathways Project
Canada’s 1990−2050 GHG Emissions by Sector (DDPP) Mt CO e
2
Greenhouse Gas Categories 2015 2050 % Change Relative to 2015
TOTAL 651 78 -88%
Residential Buildings 37 0 -99%
Commercial Buildings 38 1 -99%
Transportation Personal 88 3 -97%
Transportation Freight 112 5 -95%
Chemical Products 13 3 -75%
Industrial Minerals (Cement & Lime) 16 1 -93%
Iron and Steel 12 4 -66%
Metal Smelting 11 3 -73%
Mineral Mining 5 3 -52%
Paper Manufacturing 6 1 -84%
Other Manufacturing 21 5 -77%
Waste 8 5 -44%
Electricity 86 6 -93%
Petroleum Refining 21 1 -96%
Petroleum Crude Extraction 134 19 -86%
Natural Gas Extraction 37 14 -62%
Coal Mining 2 2 -27%
Ethanol Production 2 0 -85%
Biodiesel Production 0 3 677%
CANADA’S MID-CENTURY LONG-TERM LOW-GREENHOUSE GAS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 87