 
 
(UNOFFICIAL  TRANSLATION) 
 
 
 
China’s Mid-Century Long-Term Low 
Greenhouse Gas Emission Development 
Strategy1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
1 This is an unofficial translation. In case of any divergence, the official text in the 
Chinese language shall prevail. 
 
  
 
CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................ 1 
CHAPTER 1. ADDRESSING CLIMATE CHANGE AND LOW-EMISSION 
DEVELOPMENT ................................................................................................................. 3 
1. Climate change is a severe threat to all mankind ................................................... 3 
2. Active response to climate change has become a global political consensus ......... 4 
3. Green and low-carbon transformation has become a general trend of global 
development ...................................................................................................................... 5 
4. China has made positive contributions to combating the global climate change ... 5 
CHAPTER 2. GUIDING PRINCIPLES AND STRATEGIC VISIONS .................. 7 
1. Guiding principles .................................................................................................. 7 
2. Strategic visions ...................................................................................................... 8 
3. Technical pathways .............................................................................................. 10 
CHAPTER 3. STRATEGIC PRIORITIES AND POLICY ORIENTATIONS .... 11 
1. Foster a green, low-carbon and circular economic system ................................... 11 
2. Build a clean, low-carbon, safe and efficient energy system ............................... 13 
3. Establish a low GHG emission industrial system ................................................. 14 
4. Impel urban and rural construction in green and low-carbon manner .................. 16 
5. Form a low-carbon comprehensive transportation system ................................... 19 
6. Achieve a substantial reduction in non-carbon dioxide GHG emission ............... 20 
7. Implement the Nature-Based Solutions ................................................................ 21 
8. Inspire low-emission technology innovation ........................................................ 24 
9. Create a new pattern of nationwide participation ................................................. 25 
10. Promote the modernization of climate governance system and governance 
capacity ............................................................................................................................ 26 
CHAPTER 4. CHINA'S APPROACHES AND ADVOCATES FOR 
PROMOTING GLOBAL CLIMATE GOVERNANCE ................................................ 27 
1. Adhere to fairness and equity ............................................................................... 27 
2. Adhere to win-win cooperation ............................................................................ 28 
3. Adhere to the respect for science .......................................................................... 28 
4. Adhere to the commitments .................................................................................. 29 
CONCLUDING REMARKS ...................................................................................... 29 
ANNEX I: LONG-TERM LOW GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSION 
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY OF HONG KONG SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE 
REGION .............................................................................................................................. 31 
ANNEX II: LONG-TERM LOW GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSION 
DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY OF MACAO SPECIAL ADMINISTRATIVE 
REGION .............................................................................................................................. 37 
 
 
  
 
Introduction 
Climate change concerns human survival and development. Since the 
Industrial  Revolution,    human  activities,  especially  the  accumulated 
carbon dioxide emission from the intensive fossil fuels consumption of 
developed countries, are the main causes of global climate change and 
pose  a  huge  threat  to  ecosystem  security  and  economic  and  social 
development in the world, especially in developing countries. Addressing 
climate change is a common cause of mankind. It calls for the international 
community  to  unite,  cooperate  and  work  together  to  address  climate 
change within the framework of sustainable development, sticking to the 
path  of  green  and  low-carbon  development,  promoting  to  build  a 
community with a shared future for mankind, and jointly building a clean 
and beautiful earth home. The globally spread COVID-19 in 2020 warns 
us once again that mankind needs a self-revolution in the face of common 
challenges of non-traditional security, such as major infectious diseases 
and climate change, all countries in the world must maintain solidarity and 
cooperation.   
In 2015, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) (hereinafter referred to as the “Convention”) 21st Conference 
of Parties (COP21) adopted the Paris Agreement, of its goal is to limit 
global  warming  to  well  below  2,  preferably  to  1.5  degrees  Celsius, 
compared  to  pre-industrial  levels.  It  defines  the  long-term  vision  and 
system  arrangements  for  global  climate  change  actions,  clarifies  the 
general direction of green and low-carbon transformation in the future, 
which requires all countries to work together to implement. China has 
made historic and fundamental contributions to the conclusion, entry into 
force and implementation of the Paris Agreement, and actively promoted 
greenhouse gas(GHG) emission reduction in international shipping and 
aviation, which has been widely recognized and highly appreciated by the 
international community. 
In 2017, the 19th National Congress of the Communist Party of China 
1 
  
 
(CPC)  proposed  to  build  a  great  modern  socialist  country  which  is 
prosperous,  strong,  democratic,  culturally  advanced,  harmonious,  and 
beautiful  by  the  middle  of  this  century,  setting  the  main  tone  for 
formulating  China's  long-term low-emission development strategy.  On 
September 22th, 2020, addressing the general debate of the 75th session 
of  the  UN  General Assembly,  Chinese  President  Xi  Jinping  solemnly 
announced that China will scale up its Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions by adopting more vigorous policies and measures, striving 
to peak carbon dioxide emission before 2030 and achieve carbon neutrality 
before 2060. On December 12, 2020, addressing the Climate Ambition 
Summit, President Xi Jinping announced some further commitments for 
2030, China will lower its carbon dioxide emission per unit of GDP by 
over 65 percent from the 2005 level, increase the share of non-fossil fuels 
in primary energy consumption to around 25 percent, increase the forest 
stock volume by 6 billion cubic meters from the 2005 level, and bring its 
total  installed  capacity  of  wind  and  solar  power  to  over  1.2  billion 
kilowatts. These announcements not only provide guidance and blueprint 
for China's green and low-carbon development, but also contribute and 
inject strong impetus on China's proposals for other countries to jointly 
meet the challenge of global climate change and protect our planet. In the 
process  of  achieving  carbon  neutrality,  China  will  unswervingly 
implement the national strategy of actively addressing climate change and 
make greater contribution to maintaining global ecological security and 
build a community with a shared future for mankind. 
Under  the  guidance  of  Xi  Jinping’s  Thought  on  Socialism  with 
Chinese  Characteristics  in  the  New  Era,  in  accordance  with  the  new 
development philosophy of innovative, coordinated, green and open for 
the benefit of all, and according to the relevant decisions of the Paris 
Climate Conference and the relevant requirements of the Paris Agreement, 
Chinese government has completed the China’s Mid-Century Long-Term 
Low  Greenhouse  Gas  Emission  Development  Strategy  (hereinafter 
2 
  
 
referred  to  as  the  "Low-Emission  Development  Strategy")  based  on 
national  conditions  and  future  development  strategy  with  in-depth 
research and demonstration and extensive solicitation of opinions from all 
parties. The Low-Emission Development Strategy puts forward the basic 
principles and strategic vision, strategic priorities and policy guidance for 
China's long-term low-emission development, as well as the concepts and 
propositions  for  promoting  global  climate  governance.  The  Chinese 
government  will  integrate  relevant  requirements  in  the  low-emission 
development strategy into the national economic and social development 
plan and continue to implement them. 
 
Chapter 1. Addressing Climate Change and Low-emission 
Development 
 
Climate change is one of the major threats and severe challenges to 
sustainable development of mankind. The Paris Agreement on climate 
change charts the course for the world to transition to green and low-
carbon  development  and  require  all  countries  to  work  together  to 
implement it. All countries must take decisive steps, and follow the path 
of low-emission development unswervingly, build and maintain a global 
ecological security barrier, and work together to build a green earth home. 
1. Climate change is a severe threat to all mankind 
Since  1990,  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  has 
issued  six  assessment  reports,  and  increasingly  sufficient  scientific 
evidences show the authenticity, severity and urgency of global warming. 
According to the latest report of the World Meteorological Organization, 
the global average temperature in 2019 was 1.1°C higher than the pre-
industrial levels, and the carbon dioxide concentrations reached a record 
of 410 ppm in the first half of 2020. Major risks such as frequent extreme 
weather  events,  species  extinction,  sea  level  rises,  and  crop  yields 
3 
  
 
reduction brought by climate change seriously threaten human survival 
and sustainable development. China is one of the countries most adversely 
affected  by  climate  change. The  proportion of  direct  economic  losses 
caused by climate change in GDP is much higher than the global average 
level  in  the  same  period.  Science  has  confirmed  that  greenhouse  gas 
emitted by human activities since the Industrial Revolution are the main 
cause of climate change. It is imperative to control GHG emission, and 
necessary  to  accelerate  the  pace  of  low-emission  development  and 
transformation in order to protect mankind’s home planet. 
2. Active response to climate change has become a global political 
consensus 
Scientific  cognition  has  promoted  countries  to  reach  a  political 
consensus on addressing climate change, leading to the adoption and entry 
into force of the UNFCCC, the Kyoto Protocol and the Paris Agreement. 
In particular, the Paris Agreement proposes to keep the increase in global 
average temperature to well below 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and 
strive to control it within 1.5°C, reach the global greenhouse gas emissions 
peaking as soon as possible, meet the balance between anthropogenic 
GHGs emission and removals by sinks in the second half of this century. 
The adoption and entry into force of the Paris Agreement demonstrate the 
political choice of all country’s governments to take the path of green and 
low-carbon  transformation  and  protect  our  planet.  In  2018,  the 
International Maritime  Organization adopted an initial strategy on the 
reduction of GHG emission from ships, set out a vision to make a 40% 
reduction in the carbon intensity per unit of freight of the global shipping 
industry by 2030 compared with 2008, a 70% reduction in carbon intensity 
and a 50% reduction in total carbon dioxide emission by 2050, and achieve 
zero  emission  within  this  century.  Facing  with  the  challenges  of 
unilateralism, protectionism, and anti-globalization, countries around the 
world should not regress in their commitments and actions  to climate 
change. And in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic and the downward 
4 
  
 
pressure on the economy, all countries should unswervingly adhere to the 
Paris Agreement, promote a “green recovery” after the  epidemic, and 
make concerted efforts to promote the low-emission development globally. 
3. Green and low-carbon transformation has become a general 
trend of global development 
The requirement of actively addressing climate change has greatly 
promoted the global research, development and innovation of low-carbon 
technology, continuously improved energy efficiency, and reduced the cost 
of various low-carbon energy technologies, especially renewable energy 
technologies, low consumption and low emission industrial development 
modes  replace  the  energy  intensive  and  highly  polluting  industries 
development  modes.  Since  the  beginning  of  the  21st  century,  global 
scientific and technological innovation has entered an unprecedentedly 
intensive and active period. A new round of scientific and technological 
revolution and industrial transformation is reshaping the global innovation 
landscape and economic structure, providing strong support for countries 
to achieve green and low-carbon development and transformation. Dozens 
of countries, hundreds of cities and thousands of companies around the 
world have proposed the goal of achieving carbon neutrality at different 
stages,  the  global  transformation  of  low-emission  development  is 
unprecedented. 
4. China has made positive contributions to combating the global 
climate change 
China has always attached great importance to addressing climate 
change. President Xi Jinping has stressed many times that addressing 
climate change is not something that others ask us to do, but something 
that we must do ourselves. In 2007, The State Council set up the National 
Leading Group on Climate Change, Energy Conservation and Emission 
Reduction, headed by the Premier of The State Council, and took the lead 
among developing countries in releasing the National Climate Change 
Program. In 2009, China announced its Nationally Appropriate Mitigation 
5 
  
 
Actions to the international community by 2020, and has included the 
reduction of carbon dioxide emission per unit of GDP as a binding target 
in the five-year plan for national economic and social development since 
the 12th Five-Year Plan, which has been decomposed the national carbon 
intensity reduction target to local governments and implemented it in the 
earnest.  In  2015  China  announced  its  Nationally  Determined 
Contributions, and in both September and December 2020, President Xi 
Jinping announced China's new nationally determined contribution targets. 
In May 2021, China set up a leading group on carbon peak and carbon 
neutrality,  headed  by  Vice  Premier  of  The  State  Council,  to  further 
strengthen the overall planning, coordination and promotion of the work 
of achieving carbon peak and carbon neutrality.   
China implements an active national strategy on addressing climate 
change, solidly promotes various policies and actions to it as well, series 
measures  have  been  adopted,  such  as  adjusting  industrial  structure, 
optimizing  energy  structure,  conserving  energy  and  improving  energy 
efficiency, promoting the construction of carbon markets, and increasing 
forest  carbon  sinks,  and  achieved  remarkable  results.  Preliminary 
estimates show that carbon dioxide emission per unit of GDP in China has 
been reduced by 48.1% in 2019 compared with 2005 levels, and the share 
of non-fossil energy in energy consumption reached 15.3%, China has 
fulfilled ahead of schedule the action target of controlling GHGs emission 
by 2020. China has taken an active part in global climate governance and 
international cooperation on climate change, China keeps the promise, 
makes important contributions to combating the global climate change, 
and becomes an important participant, contributor and leader in global 
ecological civilization construction. 
The carbon neutral vision proposed by China means that it will be 
achieved from the peak of carbon dioxide emissions to carbon neutral in a 
short period of about 30 years, it is much shorter than many other major 
economies that have already proposed a carbon neutral vision. China is 
6 
  
 
still  a  developing  country  and  faces  multiple  challenges,  such  as 
developing the economy, improving people’s livelihood and controlling 
pollution.Comparing with developed countries, China will face greater 
difficulties and challenges in achieving a comprehensive green and low-
carbon transition in a relatively short period of time. 
 
Chapter 2. Guiding Principles and Strategic Visions 
 
1. Guiding principles 
It is a common cause of mankind to address climate change. China 
will adhere to the guidance of Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with 
Chinese  Characteristics  for  a  New  Era;  fully  implement  the  guiding 
principles of the 19th CPC National Congress and the second, third, fourth 
and  fifth  plenary  sessions  of  the  19th  CPC  Central  Committee;  in 
accordance with the decisions and plans of the CPC Central Committee 
and The  State  Council,  thoroughly  implement  Xi  Jinping Thought  on 
Ecological Civilization; based on the new development stage, implement 
the new development concept, build a new development pattern, promote 
high-quality development; adhere to the system concept, and handle the 
relationship between development and emission reduction, overall and 
part, short-term and medium-to-long-term, incorporate peaking carbon 
dioxide emission and carbon neutrality into the overall layout of economic 
and social development and ecological civilization construction, take the 
lead  in  green  transformation  in  all  areas  of  economic  and  social 
development, focus on the Green and low-carbon energy development, 
accelerate  the  formation  of  resource-saving  and  environment  friendly 
industrial structures, modes of production, lifestyles and spatial patterns, 
unswervingly  pursue  ecological  priority,  green  and  low-carbon  high-
quality development roads to ensure that peaking carbon dioxide emission 
and carbon neutrality are achieved on schedule. At the same time, China 
7 
  
 
will work with the international community to take the road of green and 
low-carbon development, promote the full and effective implementation 
of  the  Paris  Agreement,  adhere  to  the  principles  of  common  but 
differentiated  responsibilities,  equity  and  respective  capabilities,  and 
establish a fair, reasonable, and win-win global climate governance system. 
Promote the construction of a community of common destiny for humanity, 
build  a  clean  and  beautiful  world,  and  march  towards  a  new  era  of 
ecological civilization together with the international community. 
2. Strategic visions 
China will resolutely implement the major announcement made by 
Chairman Xi Jinping, formulate and implement an action plan for carbon 
dioxide emission peaking before 2030. China will make good efforts to 
accelerate the construction of a green and low-carbon circular economic 
system and a clean, low-carbon, safe and efficient energy system, and 
vigorously  promote  low-carbon  technological  innovation  and  the 
development  of  low-carbon  industries,  comprehensively  form  green 
modes of production and living, significantly improve the quality and 
stability of the ecosystem, build a comprehensive and effective climate 
governance system. China will strive to reach carbon dioxide emission 
peak before 2030, and realize carbon neutrality before 2060, make greater 
efforts  and  contributions  to  achieve  the  long-term  goals  of  the  Paris 
Agreement. 
China  will  vigorously  promote  the  energy  production  and 
consumption revolution. By strengthening the dual control of total energy 
consumption  and  intensity,  the  energy  utilization  efficiency  will  be 
promoted substantially.  China will  strictly  control the  consumption of 
fossil energy, vigorously accelerate the development of non-fossil energy. 
By  2030,  the  proportion  of  non-fossil  energy  in  energy  consumption 
reaches to about 25%, and total installed wind and solar power capacity 
reached over 1.2 billion kilowatts. By 2060, China will fully establish a 
clean,  low-carbon,  safe  and  efficient  energy  system,  reach  energy 
8 
  
 
efficiency at international advanced levels, and improve the proportion of 
non-fossil fuels in energy consumption up to over 80%. 
China will accelerate green and low-carbon transformation in the 
industrial sector. Efforts will be made to accelerate the industries to peak 
carbon dioxide emission as soon as possible, which include steel, building 
materials,  non-ferrous,  petrochemical,  chemical  industry,  and 
etc..Continuously  reduce  carbon  dioxide  emission  from  industrial 
processes.Accelerate the construction of green and zero-carbon industrial 
parks and supply chain pilots. By 2030, energy efficiency in key industries 
will reach the advanced international level, "two wings" drive of low-
carbon  and  digital  economy  is  realized,  and  the  manufacturing 
organization and production methods will be fundamentally transformed. 
China  will  comprehensively  promote  the  green  and  low-carbon 
development in urban and rural construction. Efforts will be  made to 
vigorously promote the use of energy-efficient and low-carbon buildings. 
By 2025, 100% of new buildings in cities and towns will implement green 
building standards, China will accelerate the optimization of the energy 
use structure of buildings, the fossil fuel replacement rate by renewable 
energies in urban buildings will reach 8%, and the rooftop photovoltaic 
coverage of new public buildings and new factory buildings will strive to 
reach 50%. 
China  will  accelerate  the  development  of  a  low-carbon  transport 
system, and actively expand the application of electric power, hydrogen 
energy, natural gas, and advanced liquid biofuels in transportation. By 
2030, the proportion of new energy and clean energy-powered vehicles 
will reach about 40% of all the vehicles sold in that year, the carbon 
emission  intensity  of  converted  turnover  of  commercial  vehicles  will 
decrease  about  9.5%  from  2020  level,  and  the  comprehensive  energy 
consumption per unit of converted turnover of railways will drop by 10% 
from 2020 level, and oil consumption by land transportation strives to peak. 
China  will  accelerate  the  promotion  of  nature-based  solutions, 
9 
  
 
incorporate the sustainable use of natural resources into the policy and 
action framework for addressing climate change, maximize the mitigation 
effect  of  nature  in  forestry,  agriculture,  oceans,  water  resources, 
ecosystems and other fields, and comprehensively improve resilience in 
addressing climate change. By 2030, China's forest coverage rate will 
reach about 25%, and forest stock volume will increase 6 billion cubic 
meters over 2005 level. 
Efforts will also be made to advocate a simple, moderate, green and 
low-carbon life philosophy, and widely form green modes for production 
and living. China will establish and improve the legal and institutional 
systems, policies and standards to address climate change, enhance the role 
of  market  mechanism,  and  thus  form  endogenous  driving  forces  to 
promote the green and low-carbon transformation. 
3. Technical pathways 
The development of energy-saving technologies will be promoted 
continuously, the energy efficiencies will be improved from an overall and 
systematic perspective by accelerating the popularization of advanced and 
applicable  energy-saving,  low-carbon,  zero-carbon  technologies  and 
manufacturing techniques, by applying advanced technologies including 
intelligent manufacturing, systematic integration, and circular linkage into 
the energy production and consumption process. 
The electrification level in end-use sectors will speed up. Electricity 
will  be  the  main  energy  source  in  end-us  sectors  by  improving 
infrastructure and promoting electricity substitution technologies, it will 
vigorously improve the substitution of electricity for other forms of energy 
in end-use energy fields such as industrial and agricultural production, 
transportation, and urban and rural residents' lives. 
China will accelerate the development of a new electric power system, 
vigorously  develop  renewable  energies  and  advanced  nuclear  energy 
technologies,  accelerate  the  development  of  non-fossil  energy  in  cost 
reduction  and  efficiency  improvement  and  integrate  with  the  modern 
10 
  
 
information technology revolution, actively develop "new energy + energy 
storage", "source-network-load-storage" and "integration of multi-energy 
system",  support  distributed  new  energy  storage  system,  and  promote 
large-scale optimization of clean power resources. 
China will actively expand the application of new and clean energy 
in  steel,  cement,  aviation  and  shipping,  such  as  electricity,  hydrogen 
energy,  natural  gas  and  advanced  liquid  biofuels.  China  will  actively 
promote the development and application of high-efficiency and low-cost 
carbon dioxide removal technologies, and accelerate the development of 
large-scale and whole-process pilot and construction of carbon capture, 
utilization  and  storage  (CCUS)  in  electric  power,  steel,  cement  and 
chemical industries. 
China will enhance carbon sink of ecosystems. Efforts will be made 
to implement major projects to protect and restore important ecosystems, 
and carry out integrated protection and restoration of mountains, rivers, 
forests, farmland, lakes, grasslands, and sand. China will strengthen the 
land greening action, improve the protection of forest resources and the 
conservation  and  restoration  of  grassland  ecosystems,  enhance  the 
protection  and  restoration  of  rivers,  lakes  and  wetlands,  promote  the 
protection and restoration of marine ecosystems, promote the restoration 
and treatment of degraded land, and ecological restoration projects will be 
carried out in historical mines. 
 
Chapter 3. Strategic Priorities and Policy Orientations 
 
1. Foster a green, low-carbon and circular economic system 
Efforts will be made to adjust the economic structure, transform the 
development mode, promote development of the creation of low-carbon 
new  technologies,  new  products,  new  industries,  new  models,  new 
business forms and new economies, cultivate a green, low-carbon and 
circular  economic  system,  and  continuously  improve  the  quality  and 
11 
  
 
efficiency of development.   
Foster new drivers of green and low-carbon development. 
⚫  Accelerate  the  development  of  strategic  emerging  industries 
including  a  new  generation  of  information  technology, 
biotechnology, new energies, new materials, high-end equipments, 
new energy vehicles, green environmental protection, aerospace, 
marine equipment and others, and achieve the deep green and 
low-carbon  transformation  of  traditional  industries,  energy, 
building, and transportation infrastructure. 
⚫  Accelerate  the  construction  of  a  green  manufacturing  system, 
cultivate new growth poles and form new momentum in industries 
with  cutting-edge  technologies,  high  value  and  low  emission 
including digital economy, clean energy, smart city, etc., actively 
promote  the  construction  of  new  infrastructure  and  scale 
development  of  emerging  low  carbon  industries,  cultivate  a 
number of advanced green manufacturing clusters, making the 
green manufacturing industry a new engine and new advantage 
for economic growth. 
Establish a green, low-carbon, and sustainable investment and 
consumption system. 
⚫  Give full play to the guiding role of government investment, and 
establish an investment and financing system that is compatible 
with carbon peak and carbon neutrality, and further stimulate the 
endogenous power and market vitality of the whole society to 
promote green and low-carbon development. 
⚫  Accelerate the establishment of institutions and systems for green 
investment  and  consumption,  establish  and  improve  climate-
friendly policy systems, reduce the cost of climate investment and 
financing,  encourage  more  private  capital  to  invest  in  low-
emission  industries,  improve  institutions  and  mechanisms  for 
promoting green consumption, and meet the people's growing 
12 
  
 
needs for a beautiful ecological environment. 
2. Build a clean, low-carbon, safe and efficient energy system 
China  will  persist  pushing  forward  the  energy  production  and 
consumption revolution, vigorously improve energy utilization efficiency 
and accelerate the transition of the energy structure to a clean and low-
carbon direction while ensuring the safe supply of energy and meeting the 
internal needs of the sustainable development of the national economy and 
the continuous improvement of people's living standards.   
Significantly improve energy efficiency. 
⚫  Adhere  to  the  energy  development  strategy  of  energy 
conservation  as  top  priority,  implement  energy  conservation 
throughout  the  whole  process  of  economic  and  social 
development and in all sectors. 
⚫  Adhere the dual controls on energy intensity and total energy 
consumption.  Curb  irrational  energy  consumption,  promote 
rational allocation of energy resources, and substantially increase 
utilization efficiency. 
Strictly control total fossil energy consumption. 
⚫  Vigorously promote clean utilization of coal. Strictly control coal 
power projects. Strictly control the growth of coal consumption 
during the “14th Five-Year Plan” (14th FYP, 2021-2025) period, 
and gradually reduce it during the 15th FYP period (2026-2030). 
⚫  Oil consumption reached a peak plateau during the 15th FYP 
period. Accelerate the replacement of fossil fuels with non-fossil 
fuels. 
Vigorously developed non-fossil energies. 
⚫  Accelerate  the  pace  of  renewable  energies  development, 
vigorously  develop  renewable  energies  including  wind,  solar, 
biomass,  and  marine  energies.  Develop  hydropower  in 
accordance with local conditions. 
⚫  Develop nuclear power actively and with an organized pace on 
13 
  
 
the premise of ensuring safety. 
⚫  Continuously  increase  the  proportion  of  non-fossil  energy  in 
energy consumption. 
3. Establish a low GHG emission industrial system   
Focusing  on  the  improvement  of  resource  and  energy  utilization 
efficiency and improving the green level of production, efforts should be 
made to promote energy conservation, clean production and the green 
technological  innovation,  adjust  industry  energy  structure  and  modes, 
deepen  the  implementation  of  green  manufacturing  projects, 
comprehensively build green manufacturing system, and promote green 
and low-carbon transformation in key industries. 
Accelerate  the  green  transformation  of  traditional  industrial 
production methods. 
⚫  To  innovate  industrial  modes,  enterprise  form,  and  business 
modes to improve the level of production management, energy 
resource  allocation  and  quality  management,  therefore  greatly 
improve  the  efficiency  of  industrial  energy  utilization,  and 
promote the source reduction of industrial solid waste and make 
the comprehensive utilization of resources.   
⚫  To accelerate the construction of a green manufacturing system, 
with the aim of promoting the green development of the entire 
industrial  chain  and  product  life  cycle,  strengthen  the  system 
integration  and  resources  sharing  among  enterprises  and 
industries, build a green development standard system regarding 
green  manufacture,  industrial  energy  and  water  conservation, 
comprehensive  utilization  of  resources  and  clean  production. 
Establish a unified green products certification and identification 
system to increase the supply of green products. 
⚫  To carry out evaluation of clean production and certification of 
low-carbon products, accelerate the upgrade and re-engineering 
of industrial processes, promote clean and low-carbon production 
14 
  
 
focusing on green design and system optimization, and build a 
low  carbon  emission  supply  chain  that  covers  procurement, 
production, marketing, recycling, and logistics.   
Vigorously develop circular economy. 
⚫  To promote the accelerated development of green technology, 
environment- friendly materials, green technology and equipment, 
recycling of waste products and remanufacturing, develop and 
promote  high-performance,  lightweight,  green  and 
environmentally friendly new materials, and promote products 
intelligent sorting and high-value utilization, fine dismantling and 
clean  regeneration  of  solid  waste,  such  as  scrap  metal,  waste 
plastic, waste textiles and clothing, accelerate the establishment 
of recycling renewable resource system.   
⚫  To increase the innovation of new materials and technologies 
R&D, and promote material substitution focusing on new material 
technologies, so as to reduce the demand for raw materials and 
efficient use, and improve the level of resource recycling. 
Promote  optimization,  upgrading  and  low-carbon 
transformation of key industries.   
⚫  To formulate implementation plan for achieving carbon emission 
peak  for  sub-sectors  of  industries  such  as  iron  and  steel, 
nonferrous  metals,  petrochemical  and  chemicals,  and  building 
materials,  and  accelerate  the  deployment  of  research  and 
application  of  new  production  processes  such  as 
hydrogenmetallurgy.   
⚫  To improve key industries’ quality and performance, to eliminate 
outdated  production  capacity  in  accordance  with  laws  and 
regulations, and optimize the layout of production capacity.   
⚫  By  optimizing  the  product  structure,  extending  the  industrial 
chain, enhancing the added value of products, to accelerate the 
intensive and high-end development of traditional industries. 
15 
  
 
⚫  To accelerate the optimization and upgrading of the industrial 
structure, and shift the focus of development from high energy-
consuming industries to high value-added, high-tech industries 
and strategic emerging industries.   
⚫  Vigorously promote the application of renewable energies in the 
industries.   
4.  Impel  urban  and  rural  construction  in  green  and  low-carbon 
manner 
China will accelerate the establishment of a green and low-carbon 
innovation  system  for  building  sector  that  meets  China's  national 
conditions. While meeting the growing energy demand in the building 
sector  brought  about  by  new  urbanization,  economic  and  social 
development and the improvement of people’s living standards, efforts 
will be made to optimize the end-use energy structure, control the total 
energy  consumption  in  the  building  sector,  and  improve  the  building 
energy efficiency simultaneously. 
Develop green buildings in an all-round way.   
⚫  Promote the use of green low-carbon building materials and green 
construction  methods,  accelerate  the  industrialization  of  new 
buildings, vigorously promote the use of prefabricated buildings, 
steel  structure  housing,  recycling  of  building  materials,  and 
strengthen green design and green construction management.     
⚫  Promote the green construction of counties. Establish a green and 
low-carbon-oriented urban and rural planning and construction 
management  mechanism,  formulate  building  demolition 
management measures, and put an end to "large-scale demolition 
and construction". Build green towns and communities. 
Vigorously optimize the building energy structure. 
⚫  Vigorously promote the use of renewable energies in buildings, 
and maximize the use of integration of photovoltaics into the 
building envelope. Actively promote clean heating in severe cold 
16 
  
 
and cold areas, promote central heating by using combined heat 
and power technology, accelerate the large-scale application of 
industrial  waste  heat  heating,  actively  and  steadily  carry  out 
demonstrations projects of nuclear heating, and deploy clean and 
low-carbon heating technologies such as heat pumps, biomass, 
geothermal, and solar energy in accordance with local conditions. 
Provide guidance of scientific heating in hot summer and cold 
winter  areas,  and  adopt  clean  and  efficient  heating  methods 
according to local conditions.   
⚫  Improve the electrification level of the building sector, and forster 
development of building with photovoltaic，energy storage，direct 
current，flexibility (PEDF) system.   
Promote the low-carbon transformation of urban construction 
and management.   
⚫  To promote the cluster development for urban areas, scientifically 
determine  the  scale  of  urban  construction,  and  control  the 
excessive growth of new construction land. Advocate the concept 
of green and low-carbon planning and design, strengthen urban 
and rural climate resilience, and build sponge cities. 
⚫  To implement the evaluation mechanism on city development, 
promote the integration of green and low-carbon development 
concepts into the urban planning, design, construction, operation 
and management, and simultaneously optimize the urban spatial 
layout and governance pattern.   
⚫  To promote the construction of urban infrastructure and urban 
renewal process, and push forward urban ecological restoration 
and functional improvement projects.   
⚫  To promote the steel structure buildings actively, improve the 
green and low-carbon building operation and management system, 
and continuously optimize and improve the level of green and 
low-carbon building operations.
 
17 
  
 
Strengthen the development of green and low-carbon counties.   
⚫  To make full use of the original topography, landforms and natural 
environment in building counties, and maintain the landscape and 
natural features.   
⚫  To  properly  control  the  construction  density,  intensity  and 
residential  building  height.  Increase  the  proportion  of  green 
buildings in newly built buildings. 
⚫  To  vigorously  develop  renewable  energy  that  meets  the  local 
resource endowments and needs of the county, and reduce the 
proportion of traditional fossil energies in energy consumption.   
⚫  Push forward green and energy-saving infrastructure, advocate a 
combination  of  large-scale  decentralization  and  small-regional 
infrastructure  layout,  and  apply  distributed  energies,  sewage 
treatments and other facilities according to local conditions.
 
Speed  up  the  modernization  of  rural  houses  and  villages 
construction.   
⚫  To improve the design and construction level of rural houses, 
solve the problems including rural house sunshine duration, heat 
preservation and heating, ventilation and lighting according to 
local conditions, promote the construction of green rural houses, 
encourage the use of native materials and green building materials, 
and promote energy conservation and carbon emission reduction 
in rural houses. 
⚫  To actively use solar energy, biomass energy, air thermal energy, 
geothermal energy and other clean energies to solve the energy 
demands of heating, cooking, domestic hot water and  etc. for 
farmhouse.   
⚫  To  popularize  the  miniaturized,  ecological,  and  decentralized 
rural sewage treatment methods, enhance the reduction of rural 
domestic waste from the source, push forward the rural energy 
reform, and simultaneously encourage the use of clean energy that 
18 
  
 
suits the local characteristics and needs of rural areas. 
5. Form a low-carbon comprehensive transportation system 
China will put same emphasis on optimizing supply and demand 
inducing, and give full play to the comparative advantages and combined 
efficiency  of  various  transportation  modes,  and  accelerate  the 
establishment of a green, low-carbon and integrated transportation system.   
Create a low-carbon and efficient transportation system.   
⚫  Build a comprehensive three-dimensional transportation network 
and integrate the concept of green development throughout the 
entire process of transportation infrastructure planning, design, 
construction, operation, and maintenance, and actively promote 
the  construction  of  green  railways,  green  highways,  green 
waterways, green ports, green airports, and green hubs.   
⚫  Accelerate the optimization and adjustment of the transportation 
structure, continue to deepen the construction of special railways 
and special railway lines, actively develop direct river-sea and 
river-sea  combined  transportation,  strive  to  increase  the 
proportion of combined iron and water transportation, accelerate 
the promotion of the "revolution to rail" and "revolution to water" 
of  bulk  cargo  in  coastal  ports,  and  vigorously develop multi-
modal high-efficiency transportation organization modes such as 
combined transportation, drop-and-pull transportation and joint 
distribution, improve the efficiency of transportation operations, 
promote the standardization of freight vehicles, and accelerate the 
application of recyclable standardized logistics turnover boxes.   
⚫  Promote the development of smart transportation, and actively 
develop new technologies, new business formats, and new models 
such as autonomous driving and shared cars. 
⚫  Accelerate the development, promotion and application of key 
energy-saving and low-carbon technologies and products in the 
transportation sector. 
19 
  
 
Accelerate  the  transformation  of  energy  structure  in  the 
transportation sector.   
⚫  Continue to increase the retention rate of new energy vehicles. 
⚫  Promote  the  realization  of  electrification,  new  energy  and 
cleanness of urban public transportation and urban logistics and 
distribution  vehicles  and  promote  the  use  of  new  energy  for 
private cars and trucks.   
⚫  Promote the application of low-carbon energy ships and explore 
the application of biomass fuels and other synthetic fuels in civil 
aviation.   
⚫  Increase the application of renewable energy such as solar energy, 
wind  energy  and  geothermal  energy  in  transportation 
infrastructure,  accelerate  the  improvement  of  the  LNG  and 
hydrogen energy supply (filling) system, and focus on solving the 
problems  of  difficult  approval,  construction,  and  operation  of 
marine LNG refueling stations. Build (near) zero-carbon hubs, 
stations and ports (port areas). 
Speed up the construction of a green travel system.   
⚫  Strengthen  the  comprehensive  management  of  urban  traffic 
congestion,  give  priority  to  the  development  of  urban  public 
transportation,  encourage  the  public  to  preferentially  choose 
urban  public  transportation  to  travel,  improve  the  urban  slow 
traffic system, and increase the proportion of green travel.   
⚫  Actively  develop  large-capacity  and  high-efficiency  inter-
regional rapid passenger transport services with high-speed rail 
and aviation as the mainstay, improve the level of rail transit 
commuting  in  urban  agglomerations,  and  encourage  the  mass 
transit form operation of intercity road transportation in areas with 
high passenger demand. 
6.  Achieve  a  substantial  reduction  in  non-carbon  dioxide  GHG 
emission 
20 
  
 
Coordinate  the  management  and  control  of  non-carbon  dioxide 
GHGs emission for energy, industrial production processes, agriculture, 
waste  treatment  and  other  fields.  Carry  out  actions  to  strengthen  the 
coordinated  control  of  GHG  emission  and  air  pollutant  emission,  to 
include different types of non-carbon dioxide GHGs emission into the 
scope of quantitative management and control in a focused, step-by-step, 
and phased manner, and to establish and improve non-carbon dioxide 
emission statistical accounting system, policy system and management 
system.  Actively  implement  the  Kigali  Amendment  to  the  Montreal 
Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer, and strictly require 
all difluoro-chloromethane production enterprises to harmlessly dispose of 
their by-product trifluoro methane. Increase the research and development 
of  low-carbon  and  environmentally  friendly  alternative  technologies. 
Actively adopt low global warming potential alternative technologies in 
the process of replacing HCFCs to reduce emission; promote the recovery, 
reuse  and  harmless  treatment  of  controlled  substances,  and  support 
relevant production companies to create green factories and strictly control 
leakage and discharge of controlled substances during production. Priority 
should  be  given  to  the  implementation  of  alternative  and  emission 
reduction HFC actions in industries where alternative technologies are 
relatively mature. 
7. Implement the Nature-Based Solutions 
China will uphold the harmonious coexistence of human and nature, 
efforts will be made to exploit the potential of "Nature-Based Solutions" 
in GHGs emission reduction and increase the carbon sink, improve the 
climate resilience of terrestrial and marine ecosystems, and enable green 
mountains  and  clear  water  to  continue  to  exert  benefits  in  ecological 
conservation and economic and social development.   
Form a territorial spatial layout and ecosystem that can reduce 
emission and increase sinks.   
⚫  Give full play to the strategic lead and strengthened control of 
21 
  
 
territorial space planning on the territorial space development and 
protection,  improve  and  implement  the  strategy  of  major 
functional zones based on the evaluation of the carrying capacity 
of resources and the environment and the suitability evaluation of 
territorial  space  development,  making  overall  plans  for  the 
development and protection of territorial space in the new era.   
⚫  Persist  in  the  living  community  concept  of  mountains,  rivers, 
forests,  fields,  lakes,  grasslands  and  deserts  and  implement 
measures and policies according to local conditions. Coordinate 
efforts  to  promote  afforestation,  ecological  restoration  and 
systemic  governance,  and  promote  and  improve  the  service 
functions of ecosystem. Reduce the social costs of climate change 
mitigation  and  improve  the  resilience  of  territorial  space  by 
protecting, restoring and improving natural resource management. 
Promote agriculture’s green and low-carbon development.   
⚫  Make the development orientation of agriculture from increasing 
production to improving quality and efficiency, and develop green, 
low-carbon circular agriculture with the basic characteristics of 
"ecological green, high-quality, and environmentally friendly",   
⚫  Promote the resource-saving and recycling-oriented development 
of agriculture, focusing on saving land, water, fertilizer, medicine, 
energy, and labor, and effectively reduce material consumption 
and resource input in agricultural production including facility 
planting  and  large-scale  breeding,  and  improve  agricultural 
production efficiency and comprehensive benefits.   
⚫  Innovate the comprehensive utilization mechanism of agricultural 
waste,  formulate  and  implement  policies  for  comprehensive 
utilization of agricultural waste, optimize the industrial structure 
of comprehensive utilization of agricultural waste and improve 
the quality and efficiency.   
⚫  Vigorously  push  forward  the  research  and  development, 
22 
  
 
promotion  and  application  of  ecological  technologies,  green 
technologies and carbon sink technologies, promote the recycling 
of  straws,  livestock  and  poultry  breeding  wastes,  protect  and 
improve  cultivated  land  quality,  and  achieve  a  healthy  and 
sustainable development of the industry. 
Strengthen ecosystem protection, restoration and carbon storage.   
⚫  Propel  major  ecological  protection  and  restoration  projects, 
strengthen the ecological protection and restoration of forests, 
grasslands, oceans, wetlands, and deserts, designate and strictly 
adhere  to  ecological  protection  red  lines,  improve  the 
comprehensive  disaster  prevention  and  control  capabilities  of 
forests and grasslands, and reduce GHG emission.   
⚫  Innovatively develop forest and grass low-carbon industries, and 
vigorously develop emerging industries including eco-tourism, 
forest  and  grassland  health  care,  new  materials,  bio-
pharmaceuticals, and biomass energies exploitation. 
⚫  Comprehensively  build  a  natural  protected  area  system  with 
national parks as the main body. Protect biodiversity, and give full 
play  to  the  function  and  role  of  ecosystems  in  responding  to 
climate change.   
⚫  Actively protect and restore blue carbon ecosystems including 
mangroves,  seagrass  beds,  and  salt  marshes,  and  explore  the 
research and practice of sink-increasing technologies including 
aquaculture carbon sinks, shell-algae fishery carbon sinks, and 
micro-biological carbon sinks.   
⚫  Strengthen scientific and technological innovation, and carry out 
carbon  source  and  sink  monitoring  and  assessment  including 
forests, grasslands, oceans, wetlands and other ecosystems and the 
inversion of human carbon dioxide emission changes based on 
satellite  remote  sensing  and  multi-source  data  assimilation 
methods. 
23 
  
 
8. Inspire low-emission technology innovation 
China  will  strengthen  R&D  and  international  cooperation  and 
accelerate the deployment and application of cutting-edge, critical and 
disruptive  technologies,  leading  by  the  planning  and  guidance  of 
technological  innovation.  The  development  and  promotion  of  various 
sustainable energy consumption technologies including energy-saving and 
energy-efficiency  improvement  can  work  as  the  emission  reduction 
measures with the lowest cost and the most synergistic benefits in the 
medium and long-term.
 
Strengthen  the  development  and  application  of  energy-saving 
technology   
⚫  Continue  to  carry  out  energy  conservation  technology 
transformation,  energy  system  optimization,  and  cascaded 
utilization of energy resources. 
⚫  Accelerate the popularization of advanced and applicable energy-
saving, low-carbon, and zero-carbon technologies and processes. 
⚫  Accelerate  the  application  of  energy  efficiency  improvement 
technologies such as demand reduction, intelligent manufacturing, 
and system integration, and improve energy efficiency from the 
overall  and  system,  taking  advantage  of  the  development  of 
artificial  intelligence,  the  Internet,  information  and 
communication  technology  and  blockchain  technology 
innovation and development. 
Vigorously develop non-fossil energy development and utilization 
technologies.   
⚫  Vigorously  support  and  develop  a  batch  of  low-cost,  high-
efficiency renewable energy utilization technologies. 
⚫  Promote  the  in-depth  integration  of  technologies  such  as  the 
Internet and big data with the renewable energy industry, and 
accelerate the independent innovation and industrial upgrading of 
new energy equipment.   
24 
  
 
⚫  Proactively develop nuclear power in a safe manner, and increase 
the research and development of advanced nuclear energy such as 
small modular reactors, so that nuclear power will continue to 
play an important role in ensuring the safe supply of electricity 
and the deep GHG emission reduction. 
Actively promote the innovative development of revolutionary 
emission reduction technologies.   
⚫  Strive  to  make  technological  breakthroughs  in  large-capacity 
wind  power,  high-efficiency  photovoltaics,  high-power  LNG 
engines,  large-capacity  energy  storage,  low-cost  renewable 
energy  hydrogen  production,  low-cost  CCUS  technology,  and 
accelerate the R&D of basic materials including carbon fiber, 
aerogel, and special steel, in order to tackling areas of weaknesses 
in fabrication of key components and parts, software, etc.   
⚫  Promote advanced and mature green, low-carbon technologies 
and  carry  out  demonstration  projects.  Build  full-process, 
integrated, and large-scale CCUS projects. Promote application 
and demonstration of molten salt energy storage for heating and 
power generation. Accelerate the development and application of 
hydrogen technologies, and explore large-scale applications in the 
sectors including industry, transportation, and construction. 
9. Create a new pattern of nationwide participation 
China will take the cultivation of the green and low-carbon lifestyle 
as an important indicator for improving the living environment and raising 
the level of social civilization. Efforts will be made to extensively advocate 
and  publicize  the  ways  of  simple  and  moderate,  green,  low-carbon, 
civilized and healthy life, and also to establish and further improve the 
policies  and  management  systems  that  promote  green  life  and  green 
consumption.   
⚫  Comprehensively enhance the public's awareness of green and 
low-carbon consumption. Popularize the concept of the green and 
25 
  
 
low-carbon development through publicity activities on World 
Earth  Day, World  Environment  Day,  Energy  Saving  Publicity 
Week and National Low-Carbon Day, and carry out legislative 
education  with  the  theme  of  promoting  green  production  and 
green living. Advocate green and healthy nutritional diet to fight 
against food waste.   
⚫  Make public institutions play the demonstration and guidance role 
in practicing green and low-carbon concepts in the whole society. 
Promote green and low-carbon housing and travel. 
10. Promote the modernization of climate governance system and 
governance capacity 
China will push forward institutional transformations and make faster 
move to build a modern climate governance system. Efforts will be made 
to establish sound legal, institutional, policy, market and support systems 
for climate governance, and basically establish a governance system that 
led by government, mainly composed by enterprise, actively engaged by 
social organizations and the public. At the same time, China will promote 
the  establishment  of  science-based  mechanisms  for  reducing  GHGs 
emission from international shipping and aviation.   
Continuously improve the legal system.   
⚫  Comprehensively  screen  and  modify  the  current  laws  and 
regulations  that  are  not  compatible  with  carbon  peaking  and 
carbon neutrality, and strengthen the coordination between laws 
and regulations. 
⚫  Enhance  research  and  formulate  special  laws  for  promoting 
carbon neutrality, accelerate the revise of the existing laws and 
regulations  including  The  Energy  Conservation  Law,  The 
Electricity Law, The Coal Law, The Renewable Energy Law, The 
Circular  Economy  Promotion  Law,  etc.,  to  enhance  their 
pertinence and effectiveness. 
Establish a sound policy system.   
26 
  
 
⚫  Issue  and  implement  the  Opinions  on  Fully,  Accurately  and 
Comprehensively Implementing the New Development Concept 
and Doing A Good Job in Carbon Peak and Carbon Neutrality 
and the Action Plan for Carbon Dioxide Peaking before 2030 
⚫  Formulate and issue implementation plans for achieving carbon 
peaking in sub-sectors such as energy, industry, urban and rural 
construction,  transportation,  agriculture  and  rural  affairs. 
Formulate  policy  systems  from  technological  support,  green 
finance, fiscal and taxation, and price perspectives.   
⚫  Accelerate the formation of a "1+N" policy system to achieve 
carbon peaking and carbon neutrality vision with clear objectives, 
reasonable  division  of  labor,  effective  measures,  and  orderly 
linkage. 
Promote the market-based mechanisms.   
⚫  Give full play to the role of market mechanisms in controlling 
GHG emission, accelerate the establishment and stable operation 
of a national carbon emission trading market with complete legal 
systems, fair and scientific quotas, active and credible emission 
control manners, active and orderly transactions, reliable facilities. 
⚫  Steadily expand the coverage of industries and types of GHGs, 
and  simultaneously  promote  the  construction  of  a  GHG 
certification and emission reduction trading market.   
⚫  Actively  participate  in  international  carbon  market-related 
cooperation.   
 
Chapter 4. China's Approaches and Advocates for Promoting Global 
Climate Governance 
 
1. Adhere to fairness and equity 
To  achieve  global  low-emission  development,  it  is  necessary  for 
27 
  
 
parties  to  comply  with  the  objectives  and  principles  laid  out  in  the 
UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement. UNFCCC set down the principles of 
common  but  differentiated  responsibilities,  fairness  and  respective 
capabilities as the cornerstone of global climate governance system. This 
lays the legal basis for global climate governance, thus providing legal 
guarantee for pursuing global low-emission development. Parties should 
follow  the  principles  and  provisions  of  the  UNFCCC  and  the  Paris 
Agreement, formulate low-emission development strategies in respect of 
their  national  conditions,  responsibilities  and  development  paths,  and 
undertake international obligations in line with their national conditions, 
and development stages. 
2. Adhere to win-win cooperation 
Mankind is a community with a shared future, and to work together 
with solidarity and cooperation is the most effective way to achieve global 
low-emission  development  pathway  and  address  climate  change.  The 
achievement  of  Paris  Agreement  is  a  milestone  in  global  climate 
governance  and  represents  the  direction of  the  global green  and  low-
carbon transition. It requires all countries to work together to implement 
it. To cope with global issues such as climate change, we should abandon 
the narrow mindset of zero-sum game, unilateralism and protectionism, 
resolutely  oppose  the  unilateral  climate  trade  barriers,  commit  to 
multilateralism, while at the same time we should work together in the 
spirit  of  partnership  with  mutual  benefits  and  win-win  results  and 
implement low-emission development strategies. At the same time, we 
should  actively  carry  out  South-South  cooperation  in  tackling  climate 
change, and vigorously support the development of green and low-carbon 
energies in developing countries. 
3. Adhere to the respect for science 
To achieve low-emission development, all parties must respect the 
scientific understanding of global climate change, raise awareness of the 
urgency and severity of climate change, and scientifically and rationally 
28 
  
 
formulate  low-emission  development  paths  that  are  in  line  with  their 
respective  national  conditions  and  development  stages.  International 
cooperation in scientific research and technological innovation to address 
climate change is a necessary precondition to achieve carbon neutrality as 
early as possible in the second half of this century. All parties should work 
together to share scientific and technological achievements and practical 
experience  in  addressing  climate  change,  and  jointly  promote  the 
development  path  transformation,  the  upgrade  of  industry,  energy 
revolution and technological innovation.   
4. Adhere to the commitments 
The full implementation of the provisions of the Convention and the 
Paris Agreement  is  the  political  basis  for  the  implementation  of  low-
emission development. The Paris Agreement is in line with the general 
direction of global development and it has not come easily. Each one 
should hold to the agreement, keep its commitments, and take positive 
actions.  Adequate,  stable  and  strong  financial  support  provided  by 
developed  countries  is  an  indispensable  prerequisite  for  developing 
countries to achieve low-emission development. While taking the lead in 
reducing emission significantly, the developed countries should continue 
to increase their support to developing countries, and help developing 
countries achieve their low-emission development strategies.   
 
Concluding Remarks 
 
As  pointed  by  China’s  chairman  Xi  Jinping,  addressing  climate 
change is an important area of global governance, and the global efforts to 
address  climate  change  serve  as  a  mirror  and  bring  us  valuable 
enlightenments  for  exploring  future  global  governance  modes  and 
promoting the building of a community with a shared future for mankind. 
He  also  emphasized  that  the  Paris Agreement  represents  the  general 
29 
  
 
direction of the global green and low-carbon transition, which requires all 
countries to work together to implement it and take decisive steps. 
It’s a common cause of mankind responding to climate change. China 
has always been a supporter of multilateralism and is willing to continue 
to strengthen communication and coordination with all parties on major 
issues such as climate change, so as to promote the establishment of a fair, 
reasonable, cooperative and win-win global climate governance system 
and make contributions in achieving a higher level of global sustainable 
development.   
As the fundamental theory is a simple theory, it is the most important 
to practice and work hard. It requires timely and strong practical actions 
by all countries to implement long-term low-carbon emission development 
strategies for the mid-century of this century, accelerate the green and low-
carbon transition of economic and social development, and promote the 
building  of  a  community  with  a  shared  future  for  mankind.  As  a 
developing  country,  China  is  willing  to  work  hand  in  hand  with  the 
international community to promote the global low-emission development 
transition,  achieve  lower  levels  of  GHG  emission,  and  jointly  move 
towards a new era of global ecological civilization. 
30 
  
 
Annex I: Long-term Low Greenhouse Gas Emission Development 
Strategy of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 
 
I. Background of Strategy Formulation   
The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region 
(HKSAR) attaches great importance to combating climate change. In 2017, 
the HKSAR Government announced Hong Kong’s Climate Action Plan 
2030+ which set out in detail the key mitigation, adaptation and resilience 
measures to combat climate change, as well as the target to reduce Hong 
Kong’s carbon intensity by 65% to 70% between 2005 and 2030, which is 
equivalent to a reduction of Hong Kong’s total carbon emission by 26% to 
36%.   
To  align  with  China’s  commitment  to  achieve  carbon  neutrality 
before  2060,  the  Chief  Executive  announced  in  the  Policy  Address 
published on 25 November 2020 that HKSAR would strive to achieve 
carbon neutrality before 2050. To this end, the Chief Executive announced 
in the 2021 Policy Address that the HKSAR Government would publish 
the  Hong  Kong’s  Climate Action  Plan  2050  in  2021  to  set  out  more 
proactive strategies and measures to reduce carbon emission, and pursue 
more  vigorous  strategies  and  measure,  and  enhanced  interim 
decarbonisation targets to reduce Hong Kong's carbon emission by 50% 
before 2035 as compared to the 2005 level. The HKSAR Government 
announced the latest Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan 2050 on 8 October 
2021. With the vision of "Zero-carbon Emission‧Liveable City‧Sustainable 
Development", it outlined HKSAR’s strategies and targets for combating 
climate change and achieving carbon neutrality. 
II.  Present Situation and Trend 
The climate change mitigation measures proposed in Hong Kong’s 
Climate Action Plan 2030+ have been progressively implemented with 
fruitful results. In 2019, electricity generation was Hong Kong’s largest 
31 
  
 
source  of  carbon  emission  (accounting  for  about  66%  of  the  total), 
followed by transport (accounting for about 18% of the total) and waste 
(accounting for about 7% of the total). Therefore, our decarbonisation 
work focuses on these three key areas.     
In  respect  of  energy,  the  HKSAR  Government  has  reached 
agreements with the two power companies to gradually replace coal with 
cleaner natural gas for electricity generation. From 2015 to 2020, the share 
of coal in the fuel mix has been reduced from around half to less than a 
quarter, while the share of natural gas has significantly increased from 
around  a  quarter  to  almost  half.  Meanwhile,  the  Government  has 
earmarked a total of $3 billion to install small-scale renewable energy 
systems at existing government premises. Installation of larger-scale solar 
energy generation systems at suitable locations at reservoirs and landfills 
are  also  being  pursued.  In  addition,  the  HKSAR  Government  has 
introduced the “Feed-in Tariff” to encourage different sectors to install 
renewable energy systems, and has installed solar photovoltaic panels for 
eligible  schools  and  non-governmental  welfare  organisations  free  of 
charge. The public response has been enthusiastic.   
Buildings account for about 90% of Hong Kong’s total electricity 
consumption,  and over  60%  of our  carbon  emission  is attributable  to 
generating electricity for our buildings. The Energy Saving Plan for Hong 
Kong’s Built Environment 2015~2025+ promulgated by the Government 
in 2015 has set a target of reducing energy intensity by 40% by 2025. So 
far, the energy intensity in Hong Kong has decreased by over 30%. The 
HKSAR  Government  has  also  taken  the  lead  in  energy  saving.  The 
Government  achieved  the  five-year  target  of  reducing  electricity 
consumption  in  government  buildings  by  5%  in  2018-2019,  one  year 
ahead of schedule, and achieved a final electricity saving of about 7.8%. 
We have also set a new Green Energy Target to further improve the energy 
performance of the whole Government by 6% by 2024-2025. 
Regarding green transport, the HKSAR Government announced in 
32 
  
 
March 2021 Hong Kong Roadmap on Popularisation of Electric Vehicles, 
setting  out  the  long-term  policy  objectives  and  plans  to  promote  the 
adoption of electric vehicles and their associated supporting facilities in 
Hong Kong, guiding Hong Kong towards zero vehicular emission before 
2050.  This  acts  in  concert  with  our  other  target  to  strive  for  carbon 
neutrality in the same time frame, with a view to meeting our aspirations 
for  “Zero  Carbon  Emission‧Clean  Air‧Smart  City”.  In  addition,  the 
HKSAR Government announced in June 2021 the Clean Air Plan for Hong 
Kong  2035.  With  the  vision  of  "Healthy  Living‧Low-carbon 
Transformation‧World Class", it sets out the actions to promote the use of 
new energy transportation, and continue planning for railway networks 
and adopt environmentally friendly transport modes in new development 
areas. 
As  for  waste  reduction,  the  HKSAR  Government  announced  in 
February 2021 the Waste Blueprint for Hong Kong 2035 which advocates 
the vision of "Waste Reduction‧Resources Circulation‧Zero Landfill". It 
sets out targets for per capita municipal solid waste disposal and recovery 
rate, and the goal of developing adequate waste-to-energy facilities with 
the aim to move away from reliance on landfills for municipal waste 
disposal by 2035.   
In addition, the HKSAR Government has been promoting a green and 
low-carbon community; raising public understanding and concern about 
the importance of climate change; as well as introducing and subsidising 
a variety of publicity and education activities, including “Low Carbon 
Living Calculator”, to facilitate behavioural change and encourage the 
public to practise low-carbon living.   
The HKSAR is moving steadily towards the 2030 carbon reduction 
target.    Hong Kong’s carbon emission reached its peak in 2014. In 2019, 
Hong Kong’s total greenhouse gas emission amounted to 40.1 million 
33 
  
 
tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO e), while the carbon intensity was 
2
reduced by about 35% when compared with the 2005 level. The per capita 
emission had dropped to about 5.3 tonnes of CO e. Preliminary estimation 
2
shows that the per capita carbon emission in 2020 would be reduced from 
the peak level of 6.2 tonnes in 2014 to about 4.5 tonnes.     
III.  Overall Target and Strategy 
The HKSAR Government is committed to deep decarbonisation, and 
strives to achieve carbon neutrality in Hong Kong before 2050 in support 
of the global efforts to combat climate change. The HKSAR Government 
will take climate actions to align with the target of the Paris Agreement, 
i.e. holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 
2°C  above  pre-industrial  levels  and  pursuing  efforts  to  limit  the 
temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.   
On specific strategies, the HKSAR Government will endeavour to 
implement the various measures set out in Hong Kong’s Climate Action 
Plan 2050, and pursue the interim decarbonisation targets set out therein 
to reduce Hong Kong's carbon emission by 50% before 2035 as compared 
to the 2005 level.   
IV.  Four Major Decarbonisation Strategies 
The four major decarbonisation strategies in Hong Kong’s Climate 
Action Plan 2050 cover the following targets and measures: 
(1)  Net-zero electricity generation 
Cease using coal for daily electricity generation by 2035; increase the 
share of renewable energy in the fuel mix for electricity generation to 
7.5%-10% by 2035, and to 15% subsequently; and try out the use of new 
energies and strengthen co-operation with neighbouring regions to achieve 
the long-term target of net-zero electricity generation before 2050. 
(2)  Energy saving and green buildings 
Reduce  the  overall  electricity  consumption  of  buildings  through 
promoting green buildings, improving energy efficiency of buildings and 
34 
  
 
stepping up efforts to lead a low-carbon lifestyle. The goal is to reduce the 
electricity consumption of commercial buildings by 30% to 40% and that 
of residential buildings by 20% to 30% from the 2015 level by 2050, and 
to achieve half of the above targets by 2035. 
(3)  Green transport 
Achieve the long-term target of attaining zero vehicular emission and 
zero carbon emission in the transport sector before 2050, through the 
electrification  of  vehicles  and  ferries,  development  of  new-energy 
transport  and  measures  to  improve  traffic  management.  The  HKSAR 
Government will cease the new registration of fuel-propelled and hybrid 
private cars in 2035 or earlier. Apart from promoting electric buses and 
commercial vehicles, the HKSAR Government also plans to collaborate 
with the franchised bus companies and other stakeholders in the next three 
years to test out hydrogen fuel cell electric buses and heavy vehicles. 
(4)  Waste reduction 
To  achieve  the  long-term  target  of  carbon  neutrality  in  waste 
management before 2050, the HKSAR Government will strive to develop 
adequate waste-to-energy facilities by 2035, so as to move away from 
reliance  on  landfills  for  municipal  waste  disposal.  The  HKSAR 
Government will also further promote waste reduction and recycling, and 
expects to implement waste charging in 2023 and regulate disposable 
plastic tableware in phases from 2025 onwards.   
5. Next Steps 
In the next 15 to 20 years, the HKSAR Government will devote about 
$240  billion  to  take  forward  various  measures  on  climate  change 
mitigation and adaptation.    The Steering Committee on Climate Change 
and Carbon Neutrality under the chairmanship of the Chief Executive was 
set up in mid-2021 to formulate the overall strategy at the highest level and 
oversee implementation and coordination. The HKSAR Government will 
35 
  
 
also set up a new Office of Climate Change and Carbon Neutrality to 
strengthen  co-ordination  and  promote  deep  decarbonisation.  Also,  a 
dedicated  advisory  committee  on  combating  climate  change  will  be 
formed to encourage different sectors in the community, including young 
people,  to  participate  actively  in  climate  actions.  The  HKSAR 
Government will, in line with the spirit of the Paris Agreement, review 
Hong Kong’s Climate Action Plan about every ﬁve years to update the 
strategies and targets for decarbonisation and other actions to combat 
climate change.   
Climate  change  is  an  imminent  global  challenge.  As  a  Special 
Administrative Region of China, the HKSAR will continue to actively 
participate in global climate actions, and further promote international and 
regional cooperation on various platforms, such as the C40 Cities Climate 
Leadership Group, Outline Development Plan for the Guangdong-Hong 
Kong-Macao  Greater  Bay  Area  and  Hong  Kong-Guangdong  Joint 
Working  Group  on  Environmental  Protection  and  Combating  Climate 
Change, for the purpose of combating climate change.     
 
 
36 
  
 
Annex II: Long-term Low Greenhouse Gas Emission Development 
Strategy of Macao Special Administrative Region 
 
I.  Current situation and trend 
The Macao Special Administrative Region (MSAR) attaches great 
importance  to  combating  climate  change.  In  order  to  align  with  the 
national climate change action target, the Government of MSAR has set a 
greenhouse  gas(GHG)  emission  reduction  target  of  reducing  carbon 
intensity by 40%-45% by 2020 compared with 2005. The carbon intensity 
in 2019 was 6.21 tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (CO e) per million 
2
patacas,  decreasing  67.1  percent  from  18.9  tons  of  CO e  per  million 
2
patacas in 2005. MSAR has already achieved its 2020 emission reduction 
target in advance. 
Macao, as a special administrative region of China and the pearl of 
the South China Sea, is a micro open economic system. In recent years, 
with the accelerated development of the construction and application of 
major regional infrastructure such as the Pearl River Delta intercity Rail, 
the  Hengqin  Island  development  and  the  Hong  Kong-Zhuhai-Macao 
Bridge, the economy and society of Macao have ushered in a new round 
of accelerated development. Based on the model scenario analysis, the 
growth  of  energy  consumption  and  carbon  emission  in  the  MSAR  is 
expected to slow down in the future, and the energy consumption elasticity 
is expected to be lower than 0.7 currently. Carbon emission in the MSAR 
are expected to drop significantly by 2050 compared to 2018, with per 
capita  carbon  emission  below  4  tons  of  CO e  (including  outsourced 
2
electricity). If a wide range of low-carbon and energy-saving policies are 
implemented  in  the  transport  and  tertiary  industries,  with  the  gradual 
intensification of these policies, energy consumption and carbon emission 
in the MSAR will be significantly reduced, and the total emission may 
reach peak before 2030. 
II. Overall strategy and objectives 
37 
  
 
Implementing Xi Jinping Thought on ecological Progress, solving 
prominent ecological and environmental problems as soon as possible, and 
modernizing  ecological  and  environmental  governance  system  and 
capacity have become the most pressing issues at present. As a micro open 
economic system, Macao profoundly grasps the interconnections among 
the construction of special zone, economic and social development, the 
utilization  of  energies  and  resources  and  environmental  quality 
improvement. The MSAR actively develops the GHG emission reduction 
potential, takes the initiative to adapt to climate change, strengthens low-
carbon  development  and  energy  conservation  and  environmental 
protection  technology  exchanges  and  cooperation,  speeds  up  the 
introduction  and  implementation  of  low  carbon  technology;  actively 
participates in and integrates into the development of the Guangdong-
Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, promotes the evaluation of green 
and low-carbon development in the Greater Bay Area; strives to reach the 
peak of carbon emission in the SAR as soon as possible, and builds the 
SAR into a model city of green development; establishes a duel control 
and reduction mechanism for both energy consumption and the intensity 
and total amount of carbon dioxide emission. 
(1) Actively integrate itself into the newest situation and trends of 
international and domestic efforts to address climate change, and take 
climate change and low-carbon development as an important development 
strategy in light of its own strategic positioning, development goals and 
plans. Per capita carbon emission of Macao in 2017 were about 5.7 tonnes, 
slightly lower than the per capita carbon emission of EU and about 30% 
higher than the global per capita carbon emission level. To this end, the 
MSAR should take the positive response to climate change and low-carbon 
development  as  the  strategic  choice  for  the  future  development,  and 
actively build a "green and low-carbon" business card and shape a good 
international image. 
(2) Determine the carbon dioxide emission reduction target of Macao 
38 
  
 
and the emission peak target as soon as possible, carry out research and 
take active roles in the "Leading The Summit City Alliance"; strive for 
lower carbon dioxide emission in 2030 than those in 2018, with per capita 
carbon  emission  less  than  5  tonnes;  achieve  significant  reductions  in 
carbon emission by 2050 compared to 2018, with per capita emission 
below 4 tons. 
(3) Promote the procurement ratio of green electricity including wind , 
photovoltaic and nuclear power,within the framework of the Guangdong-
Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area cooperation, and reduce the carbon 
emission intensity of electricity in Macao. 
(4) Actively promote the use of clean energies and reduce carbon 
emission in transportation sector. 
(5) Better manage the use of air conditioning in MSAR; buy products 
with higher energy efficiencies. 
III.  Building sector 
MSAR will control excessive growth rate of carbon emission from 
public, commercial and hotel buildings, and strive to realize decrease in 
carbon emission of building sector by 2030. 
(1) Promote green buildings with high standards in new buildings 
Coordinate  the  implementation  of  building  energy  efficiency 
standards and the research and development of green building standards. 
In the design and supervision of public housing projects, low carbon and 
energy  saving  building  standards  will  be  included,  and  relevant 
adjustments and improvements will be made in the revision of related laws 
and regulations regarding urban buildings. At the same time, efforts will 
be made to improve the design standards of public housing buildings and 
also to implement green building standards in new buildings. 
Build  a  number  of  near-zero  emission  building  demonstration 
projects. Efforts will be made for new buildings and government-funded 
public buildings to meet star-rated green building standards. And more 
work will be done to promote the integrative development of solar energy 
39 
  
 
integrated buildings and housing industrialization, making the wider use 
of  renewable  energies  in  new  public  building  projects  such  as  office 
buildings of public institutions and public housing buildings.     
(2) Promote energy-saving renovation of existing buildings 
Support the construction of distributed photovoltaic power generation 
systems on the roofs of commercial complexes and large public buildings, 
and release policies and measures to promote energy-saving renovation of 
commercial buildings. 
(3) Mandatory energy consumption supervision and management of 
buildings 
Classify and clarify the main responsibilities regarding energy-saving, 
and comprehensively strengthen the management of building energy use 
for different types of commercial buildings and public buildings, by taking 
overall consideration of rights and responsibilities of the property owners, 
property management and users.   
Make full use of technical means such as the internet and cloud 
computing  to  accelerate  the  promotion  of  building  visualization  and 
intelligent  building  energy  consumption  monitoring  and  management 
systems,  and  implement  sub-item  and  zone  measurement  control  for 
different building energy consumption systems and places such as air 
conditioning, heating, elevators, and lighting.   
Strengthen the energy-saving management of the air-conditioning 
system, and reasonably increase the summer air-conditioning temperature 
setting  in  the  office  area.  Optimize  the  design  of  the  air-conditioning 
system  and  carry  out  energy  efficiency  evaluation  after  the  air-
conditioning system is completed for newly-built public buildings that use 
central air-conditioning systems. 
IV. Transportation sector 
MSAR will Strive to reduce carbon emission from the transportation 
sector by more than 10% in 2030 compared with 2020, and achieve more 
than 30% reduction compared with 2020 by 2050. 
40 
  
 
(1) Road transportation: Strengthen the regulation of vehicle growth. 
Guide the purchase of new energy vehicles and increase the proportion of 
green transportation. Vigorously develop public transportation, accelerate 
track construction, and optimize the ground public transportation network. 
Increase the electrification ratio of official vehicles and taxis, and build 
supporting infrastructure for new energies and clean energy vehicles such 
as charging stations and charging piles. Strengthen energy conservation 
and emission reduction in the field of logistics, build green logistics system, 
accelerate the development of intensive, pollution-free, and low-energy 
logistics by looking into the entire process of transportation, warehousing, 
loading and unloading, circulation processing, packaging, and distribution. 
Encourage logistics enterprises to adopt modern logistics technologies and 
energy-saving equipments, and share third-party logistics services.   
(2) Water transportation: implement stricter clean shipping policies. 
(3) Aviation: Accelerate the application of fuel-saving technologies 
and measures, actively promote the use of aviation biofuels, and strengthen 
low-carbon renovation and operation management of airports.   
V.   Energy sector   
Efforts will be made to make the power sector peak before 2025, and 
drop  by  more  than  15%  from  the  peaking  level  in  2030,  and  further 
decrease significantly in 2050. 
(1) Expand the use of high-quality clean energy   
Accelerate  the  building  of  clean,  low-carbon,  safe  and  efficient 
modern energy system with natural gas and electricity as the mainstay, and 
establish  intelligent  low-carbon  energy  supply  system.  Under  the 
cooperation  framework  of  the  Guangdong-Hong  Kong-Macao  Greater 
Bay Area, promote the proportion of green power procurement, such as 
wind  power,  photovoltaic  power  generation,  and  nuclear  power,  and 
reduce the carbon emission intensity of electricity in the MSAR. 
(2) Vigorously develop new energy and renewable energy 
Accelerate the development and utilization of renewable energies 
41 
  
 
such as recycled water and waste heat in accordance with local conditions, 
rationally use solar energy, promote the use of distributed photovoltaic 
power generation systems in schools, hotels, and large public buildings, 
and promote the integrated application of solar and thermal buildings. 
Promote the construction of comprehensive zero-carbon demonstration 
projects,  with  the  design  of  zero-carbon  projects  incorporating  the 
renewable energies including triple-generation systems and solar panels. 
(3)  Actively  explore  the  application  of  clean  energies  in  the 
transportation sector 
In view of the important roles of clean energies in achieving global 
carbon neutrality in the future, the MSAR may consider introducing clean 
energy for transportation to reduce carbon emission in the transportation 
sector appropriately. 
VI.   Other sectors   
As a coastal city vulnerable to climate change, Macau also needs to 
continuously strengthen and improve its ability to adapt to climate change, 
especially its ability to withstand extreme weather, and reduce the loss to 
economic development and urban operation caused by flooding, storm 
surges and astronomical tides.   
VII.   Supporting measures   
Constantly raise awareness and establish the position of addressing 
climate  change  in  the  future  development  of  Macau.  Climate  change 
legislation could be in the following aspects. 
(1)  In  accordance  with  the  Basic  Law  of  the  Macao  Special 
Administrative  Region  of  the  People’s  Republic  of  China,  the  MSAR 
government has strengthened its legislative research work in addressing 
climate change and low-carbon development. 
(2) Carry out research on carbon pricing mechanism. 
(3) Broaden the coverage of the environmental protection and energy 
conservation fund, making it cover environmental protection, low-carbon 
development and energy conservation. Make use of quota auction revenue 
42 
  
 
or carbon tax revenue as the continuous funding source of the fund. 
(4)  Actively  communicate  with  mainland  in  the  formulation  of 
energy-saving and low-carbon standards, integrate the MSAR into the 
construction of the Greater Bay Area, introduce advanced energy-saving 
and  emission-reduction  technologies  from  the  Mainland,  practice  the 
ecological concept in the construction plan of the Greater Bay Area, and 
continuously  improve  and  optimize  the  MSAR’s  the  ecological  and 
environmental system. 
(5) Make full use of government procurement to continuouly promote 
the  low-carbon  products  consumption.  Establish  low-carbon  product 
catalog,  promote  the  government  to  purchase  low-carbon  products, 
establish a subsidy system for energy-saving products, and encourage the 
public to purchase energy-saving products. 
(6) Actively promote the participation of the Macao’s aviation sector 
in the linkage issues of China's Certified Emission Meductions (CCER) 
and the ICAO's Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International 
Aviation  (CORSIA),  and  use  China's  CCER  in  achieving  carbon 
neutralization of Macau's aviation emission. 
(7) Establish Pu Hui Certified Emission Reductions, promote the 
whole society to take low-carbon actions, and better quantify the effects of 
individuals' low-carbon behaviors through carbon credits. 
 
43 
 