 
 
 
 
Submission by Croatia and the European Commission on behalf of the 
European Union and its Member States 
 
Zagreb, 6 March 2020 
 
Subject: Long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategy of the European Union 
and its Member States 
 
The European Union (EU) and its Member States are fully committed to the Paris Agreement and 
its long-term goals, and call for urgently enhanced global ambition in light of the latest available 
science including the recent reports released by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC)1. The EU urges all Parties to the Paris Agreement to communicate by 2020 their mid-
century long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies to the secretariat of the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in accordance with the 
Article 4, paragraph 19 of the Paris Agreement. 
On 12 December 2019 the European Council2, taking note of the Communication of the European 
Commission on the European Green Deal3, endorsed the objective of achieving a climate-neutral 
EU by 2050, in line with the objectives of the Paris Agreement and in the light of the latest 
available science and of the need to step up global climate action4.  
The endorsement of the climate neutrality objective was reached following an inclusive institutional 
and societal debate based on the strategic long-term vision5 proposed by the European 
Commission which includes a detailed analysis6 of solutions that could be pursued for the transition 
to a net zero greenhouse gas emissions economy and insights regarding the corresponding strategic 
priorities and an enabling framework that would allow reaching climate neutrality by 2050.   
In accordance with Article 4.19 of the Paris Agreement, the EU Member States prepare their 
national long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies and submit them to the 
UNFCCC. 
   
                                                 
1   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, (2019) “Special report on the impacts of global warming of 1.5°C 
above pre-industrial levels”; Climate Change and Land: An IPCC special report on climate change, 
desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in 
terrestrial ecosystems; Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate; 2019 Refinement to 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines on National Greenhouse Gas Inventories. 
2   The European Council consists of the heads of state or government of the EU Member States together with the 
President of the European Council and the President of the European Commission. 
3  European Commission Communication (COM(2019) 640) ‘The European Green Deal’ 
4   The text of the European Council Conclusions of 12 December 2019 (EUCO 29/19) is in annex. 
5   European Commission Communication (COM(2018)773) ‘A Clean Planet for all: A European strategic long-
term vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate neutral economy’ 
6   In-depth analysis in support of the Commission Communication (COM(2018)773) By agreeing and delivering on the ambitious social and economic transformation, the EU and its 
Member States aim to inspire global climate action and demonstrate that moving towards climate 
neutrality is not only imperative, but also feasible and desirable.  
The EU and its Member States stand ready to engage with all Parties to ensure the timely delivery 
of robust and ambitious long-term low greenhouse emission development strategies in line with the 
objectives of the Paris Agreement. These strategies must reflect the need to step up collective 
ambition and provide the long-term policy guidance necessary to limit the intensifying impacts of 
climate change. 
 
 
__________________________ 
   
2 
 ANNEX 
 
EUROPEAN COUNCIL CONCLUSIONS – 12 DECEMBER 2019 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
 
1.  In the light of the latest available science and of the need to step up global climate action, the 
European Council endorses the objective of achieving a climate-neutral EU by 2050, in line 
with the objectives of the Paris Agreement. One Member State, at this stage, cannot commit 
to implement this objective as far as it is concerned, and the European Council will come back 
to this in June 2020. 
2.  The transition to climate neutrality will bring significant opportunities, such as potential for 
economic growth, for new business models and markets, for new jobs and technological 
development. Forward-looking research, development and innovation policies will have a key 
role. 
3.  Achieving climate neutrality will however require overcoming serious challenges. The 
European Council takes note of the Commission Communication on the European Green Deal 
and asks the Council to take work forward in line with paragraph 1. It recognises the need to 
put in place an enabling framework that benefits all Member States and encompasses 
adequate instruments, incentives, support and investments to ensure a cost-effective, just, as 
well as socially balanced and fair transition, taking into account different national 
circumstances in terms of starting points. 
4.  The transition will require significant public and private investments. In this context, the 
European Council welcomes and supports the announcement by the EIB that it intends to 
support EUR 1 trillion of investment in climate action and environmental sustainability in the 
period from 2021 to 2030. It underlines that the next MFF will significantly contribute to 
climate action. InvestEU has an important role in leveraging private investments for the 
transition. Tailored support for regions and sectors most affected by the transition will be 
made available from the forthcoming Just Transition Mechanism. The European Council 
welcomes the European Commission’s announcement that its forthcoming proposals will aim 
at facilitating EUR 100 billion of investment through the Just Transition Mechanism. Funding 
of transformation efforts must continue after 2030. 
5.  All relevant EU legislation and policies need to be consistent with, and contribute to, the 
fulfilment of the climate neutrality objective while respecting a level playing field. The 
European Council invites the Commission to examine whether this requires an adjustment of 
the existing rules, including on state aid and public procurement. It also invites the 
Commission to report regularly on the environmental and socio-economic impact of the 
transition to climate neutrality. 
6.  The European Council acknowledges the need to ensure energy security and to respect the 
right of the Member States to decide on their energy mix and to choose the most appropriate 
technologies. Some Member States have indicated that they use nuclear energy as part of their 
national energy mix. 
   
3 
 7.  The climate neutrality objective needs to be achieved in a way that preserves the EU’s 
competitiveness, including by developing effective measures to tackle carbon leakage in a 
WTO compatible way. In this context, the European Council takes note of the Commission’s 
intention to propose a carbon border adjustment mechanism concerning carbon-intensive 
sectors. Facilities in third countries need to adhere to the highest international environmental 
and safety standards. 
8.  The European Council invites the Commission to prepare a proposal for the EU’s long-term 
strategy as early as possible in 2020 with a view to its adoption by the Council and its 
submission to the UNFCCC. 
9.  The European Council warmly thanks Spain for the successful organisation of COP25 in 
Madrid. It invites the Commission, after a thorough impact assessment, to put forward its 
proposal for an update of the EU’s nationally determined contribution (NDC) for 2030 in 
good time before COP26. 
10.  International engagement will be crucial for the success in addressing climate change. The 
European Council calls on the Commission and the High Representative to pay particular 
attention to climate diplomacy. 
11.  The European Council will keep progress towards the EU’s objective of climate neutrality by 
2050 under review and give strategic guidance, as appropriate. 
 
 
__________________________ 
4 
 