NATIONAL 
DECARBONIZATION 
PLANAcknowledgements
The National Decarbonization Plan is a response to the request of the President of the Republic 
of Costa Rica, Mr. Carlos Alvarado Quesada, to prepare a strategic document that would offer a 
Roadmap with key actions to consolidate the process towards the decarbonization of the Costa 
Rican economy.
The elaboration of this document was led by the Minister of Environment and Energy, Mr. Carlos 
Manuel Rodríguez and the Climate Change Directorate (DCC) team, technically supported by 
both a national and an international consultant team, and financed by NDC Invest and DDPLAC 
programs of the Inter-American Development Bank (IABD). The consultation process was also 
supported by funds from the German Cooperation through the Climate Action II project. 
Technical Coordination: Andrea Meza, Director of the Climate Change Directorate. 
DCC team and advisors: Patricia Campos, Gretel Reyes, Kathia Aguilar, Iván A. Delgado, Felipe 
De León, Agripina Jenkins, Laura Mora, Ana Lucia Moya, Daniela Villalta and Francisco Vargas.
IABD team: Adrien Vogt-Schilb and Marcela Jaramillo
Consultant Team: Daniel Buira, Mónica Araya and Stephan Meyer. 
Modeling Team: Electric Power and Energy Research Laboratory (EPERLab) of the School of 
Electrical Engineering of the University of Costa Rica. 
We want to thank the participation and feedback of:
•  The Office of the First Lady  Livestock and his team
•  MINAE:  The  Vice-Ministers  of  Natural  •  MOPT:  The  Vice-Minister  of  Transport  and 
Resources;  Energy;  Environmental  Public Works and his planning team 
Management;  and  Water  and  Sea,  the  •  ICE Group: The Executive President and her 
Coordinator of the National Environmental  planning team
Council and the Directors of the following  •  RECOPE:  The  Executive  President  and  his 
dependencies:  IMN,  FONAFIFO,  SINAC,  planning team 
CONAGEBIO, SEPLASA, DIGECA and SEPSE •  MIDEPLAN: The Minister of National Planning 
•  MAG: The Vice-Minister  of  Agriculture  and  and Economic Policy
II•  The Minister for Liaison with the Private Sector •  CANATRANS: National Chamber of Transport  •  ICAFÉ: Costa Rican Coffee Institute 
•  Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Worship •  ASOMOVE  Costa  Rican  Electrical  Mobility  •  National Chamber of Milk Producers
•  Central Bank Association  •  UNESCO: United Nations Educational, Scientific 
•  COMEX: Ministry of Foreign Trade •  Heredia Utility Company ESPH and Cultural Organization 
•  MEIC: Ministry of Economy, Industry and Trade •  Ad Astra Rocket •  FAO: Food and Agriculture 
•  MIVAH:  Ministry  of  Housing  and  Human  •  Chamber of Industries of Costa Rica •  National Forestry Office
Settlements •  Costa Rican Institute of Cement and Concrete •  ECLAC: Economic Commission for Latin America 
•  MINSALUD: Ministry of Health •  National Chocolate Factory and the Caribbean
•  INCOFER: Costa Rican Railway Institute •  FLOREX •  Grüter Consulting
•  IFAM:  Municipal  Development  and  Advisory  •  Pelón Group •  Federated College of Engineers and Architects
Institute •  ASTEK: Aromas y Sabores Técnicos S.A.  •  AIVEMA: Association of Vehicle and Machinery 
•  National Union of Local Governments •  Cargill Importers 
•  COSEVI: National Road Council •  Green Energy Costa Rica •  CANATRAC:  National  Chamber  of  Freight 
•  INAMU: National Women's Institute •  CEMEX Forwarders
•  INA: National Learning Institute •  Holcim-Geocycle •  JASEC: Electricity Service Administrative Board 
•  INDER: Institute of Rural Development •  CDG Consulting Municipal of Cartago 
•  INTA:  National  Institute  of  Agricultural  •  ALIARSE •  BDA: Business Alliance for Development
Technology •  Aldi Eco Architecture •  ECA: Costa Rican Accreditation Body
•  Technological Institute of Costa Rica •  Municipality of San José •  COOPESANTOS
•  ARESEP: Public Services Regulatory Authority •  Municipality of Belén •  COOPELESCA
•  FUNDECOR •  CEGESTI: Foundation Center for Technological  •  Tetra Pak
•  FUNDECOOPERACIÓN  Management and Industrial Computing  •  Bac Credomatic
•  INCAE-CLADS •  Municipality of Coronado •  ASEGIRE:  Association  of  Entrepreneurs  of 
•  ACESOLAR: Costa Rican Solar Energy Association •  EBI Costa Rica Integral Management Electronic Waste 
•  FECON:  Costa  Rican  Federation  for  •  Municipality of Montes de Oca •  Costa Rican Association of the Soil Sciences 
Environmental Conservation •  FORTECH •  UCI: University of International Cooperation 
•  Representatives  of  the  Citizen  Consultative  •  ACEPESA: Central American Association for the  •  Costa Rica Forever Association
Council on Climate Change 5C. Economy, Health and the Environment  •  LAICA:  Sugar  Cane  Industrial  Agricultural 
•  GIZ's MiTransporte Project •  Municipality of Curridabat League 
•  World Bank PMR Project •  Municipality of Desamparados •  Agrícola El Cántaro S.A.
•  UNDP NDC Support Programme Project •  Municipality of La Unión •  IUCN:  International Union for the Conservation 
•  ICAT  Climate  Actions  Transparency  Initiative  •  Municipality of Alajuela of Nature
Project of the UNEP-DTU  •  CIRAD: Center for International Cooperation in 
•  UN Environment Technological Research 
•  NDC Partnership •  CORFOGA: Livestock Corporation 
•  CANABUS: National Chamber of Buses •  CATIE: Tropical Agronomic Research Center and 
•  Costa Rica Limpia Teaching 
•  Center for Urban Sustainability •  EARTH University
IIIContents
Presentation 10
Section 1: Executive Summary 12
Section 2: Costa Rica aspires to have a green, resilient and equitable economy without 
16
emissions.
Section 3: The Costa Rican economy and public policy created a pattern of emissions that 
19
reflects great successes, but also new challenges
Section 4: The goal of decarbonization planning is to go beyond an environmental agenda: 
27
it is to transform the economy
Section 5: Short-, medium- and long-term goals and actions for the decarbonization of the 
42
Costa Rican economy  
Decarbonization axis 1: Development of a mobility system based on safe, efficient and 
47
renewable public transport and active mobility schemes
Decarbonization axis 2: Transformation of the light-duty vehicles fleet to zero-emissions, 
53
boosted by renewable energy, not by fossil origin
Decarbonization axis 3: Promotion of a freight transport that adopts modalities, 
57
technologies and energy sources until achieving zero or the lowest emissions possible
Decarbonization axis 4: Consolidation of the national electricity system with capacity, 
flexibility, intelligence and resilience, necessary to supply and manage renewable energy  60
at a competitive cost
Decarbonization axis 5: Development of buildings of different uses (commercial, 
63
residential, institutional) under high efficiency standards and low-emission processes
Decarbonization axis 6: Transformation of the industrial sector through processes 
and technologies that use energy from renewable sources or others, sustainable and  66
efficient, with low- and zero-emissions.
Decarbonization axis 7: Development of an integrated system of maximum efficiency 
and low greenhouse gas emissions waste management based on the separation, reuse,  69
revaluation and final disposal
IVDecarbonization axis 8: Promotion of highly efficient agri-food systems that generate 
73
low-carbon export and local consumption goods
Decarbonization axis 9: Consolidation of a livestock model based on productive 
75
efficiency and reduction of greenhouse gases
Decarbonization axis 10: The management of the rural, urban and coastal territory will 
be oriented towards conservation and sustainable use, growing forestry resources and  78
ecosystem services based on nature-based solutions
Section 6: Institutional requirements and involvement for transformation 81
Section 7: Conclusions: Five priority actions 92
Annexes: Action Plan of the 10 decarbonization axes, for the period 2019-2022 95
VAcronyms
AFOLU  Agriculture, forestry and other land uses CTP  Public Transport Council
AGDP  Agricultural Gross Domestic Product DCC  Climate Change Directorate
ARESEP  Public Services Regulatory Authority DIGECA  Directorate of Environmental Quality Management
AyA  Costa Rican Institute of Aqueducts and Sewers DINADECO  National Directorate of Community Development
BANVHI  Housing Mortgage Bank ECA  Costa Rican Accreditation Body
BAU  Business-as-Usual EGBC  Low Carbon Livestock Strategy
BCCR  Central Bank of Costa Rica EIA  Energy Information Administration
°C  Degree Celsius EPA  Environmental Protection Agency of the Unites States
4C  Scientific Council on Climate Change LCA  Life Cycle Assessment
5C  Citizen Advisory Council on Climate Change FDI  Foreign Direct Investment
CFIA  Federated College of Engineers and Architects of Costa  FONAFIFO  National Forest Financing Fund
Rica
GCF  Green Climate Fund
CINDE  Investment Promotion Agency of Costa Rica
GEF  Global Environment Fund
CO2  Carbon Dioxide
GMA  Greater Metropolitan Area
COMEX  Ministry of Foreign Trade of Costa Rica
GMAS  General Algebraic Modeling System
CONACE  National Energy Conservation Commission
GHG  Greenhouse gases
CONAGEBIO  National Commission for Biodiversity Management
GTFS  General Transit Feed Specification
CORFOGA  Livestock Corporation
ICAFE  Coffee Institute of Costa Rica
COSEVI  Road Safety Council
ICE  Costa Rican Electricity Institute
CR  Costa Rica
ICT  Costa Rican Tourism Institute
VIIDB  Inter-American Development  LPG  Liquefied Petroleum Gas
Bank
MAG  Ministry of Agriculture and 
IFAM  Municipal Development and  Livestock
Advisory Institute
MEIC  Ministry of Economy, Industry 
IMN  National Meteorological  and Commerce
Institute 
MEP  Ministry of Public Education
INA  National Institute of 
MICITT  Ministry of Science, 
Apprenticeship
Technology and 
INAMU  Women National Institute Telecommunications
INCOFER  Costa Rican Railway Institute MIDEPLAN  Ministry of National Planning 
and Economic Policy
INCOP  Costa Rican Institute of Pacific 
Ports MINAE  Ministry of Environment and 
Energy
INDC  Intended Nationally 
Determined Contributions MINSALUD  Ministry of Health
INDER  Institute of Rural  MIVAH  Ministry of Housing and 
Development Human Settlements
IWO  International Work  MTCO2eq  Million tonnes of carbon 
Organization dioxide equivalent
INTECO  Technical Standards Institute  MOPT  Ministry of Public Works and 
of Costa Rica Transport
INVU  National Housing Institute MRV  Measurement, Reporting and 
Verification
IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change NAMA  Nationally Appropriate 
Mitigation Actions
IWM  Integrated Waste 
Management NDC  Nationally Determined 
Contribution
LAICA  Sugar Cane Industrial 
Agricultural League NOx  Nitrous Oxides
VIINO2  Nitrogen dioxide PES  Payment for Environmental 
Services 
NGO  Non-Governmental 
Organization  R&D  Research and Development
GWP  Global Warming Potential  RECOPE  Costa Rican Oil Refinery 
PGAI  Institutional Environmental  REDD+  Emission Reduction of 
Management Plan  greenhouse gases from 
the forests Deforestation 
GDP  Gross Domestic Product
and Degradation, through 
conservation and the 
Gg  Megatons
increase of CO2 catches
OAW  Organic Agricultural Waste
RITEVE  Vehicles Technical Revision 
PIMUS  Integrated Plan for 
SBD  Development Banking 
Sustainable Urban Mobility
System
PM10  Suspended Particle with an 
SEPLASA  Environmental Planning 
aerodynamic diameter up to 
Secretariat
10 μm
SEPSE  Energy Subsector Secretariat 
PM5  Suspended Particle with an 
Planning
aerodynamic diameter up to 
5 μm
SETENA  National Environmental 
Technical Secretariat
NAP  National Adaptation Policy
SME  Small and Medium Enterprise
PBAE  Ecological Blue Flag Program 
SIMOCUTE  National Monitoring System 
PITTA  Programa de Investigación y 
of Land and Ecosystem Cover 
Transferencia de Tecnología 
and Use 
Agropecuaria 
SINAC  National System of 
PNDIP  National Development and 
Conservation Areas
Public Investments Plan
SINAMECC  National Climate Change 
PPCN  National Carbon Neutral 
Metrics System
Program
PROCOMER  National Promoter of Trade
VIIISINIA  National Environmental 
Information System
SINIGIRH  National System of Integrated 
Management of Water 
Resources
tCO2  Tons of carbon dioxide 
tCO2eq  Tons of carbon dioxide 
carbon equivalent
TELCA  Limon’s’ Electric Freight Train
TIMES-CR  Linear optimization of energy 
modelling system
UCR  University of Costa Rica
UGL  Union of Local Governments
UN  United Nations
UNFCCC  United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate 
Change
WHO  World Health Organization
IXPresentation
This  Plan  summarizes  the  strategic  actions  that  the  Bicentennial  in 2050, in a manner consistent with the long-term goal of limiting 
Government has identified to implement the decarbonization of the  the  increase  of  average  global  temperature  to  1.5°C  above  pre-
Costa Rican economy. Decarbonization and resilience are recognized  industrial levels. According to the best available science, the adoption 
as the means to transform the current economic development model  of this objective has clear consequences, and a zero-emissions global 
into one that is based on bioeconomy, green growth, inclusion, and  economy must be reached by mid-century. As such, this would require 
on enhancing the well-being of all citizens. an advanced level of implementation in order to effectively achieve 
  the main transformational processes by 2050.
The  definition  of  the  key  actions  was  carried  out  based  on  the   
paradigm of transformational change - in contrast to the logic of  A "backcasting" approach was applied based on this long-term goal, 
incremental change - which is required to eradicate the use of fossil  taking national circumstances into account to identify public policy 
fuels in our economy. To bring the concept of decarbonization into  and action packages that must begin implementation immediately 
practice, the implemented methodology is anchored in a long-term  to reach the 2050 target. The actions are divided into three major 
vision of Costa Rica.  stages: a) foundations stage (2018-2022), b) inflection stage (2023-
  2030)  and  c)  transformation  normalization  stage  or  massive 
Costa Rica aims for a decarbonized economy with net-zero emissions  deployment (2031-2050). 
1 Having a 2050 time horizon sets long-term goals that clarify the actions  In this context, the Decarbonization Plan, the National Adaptation 
that have to be implemented in the short-term, including the decisions  Plan and Policy, and the Strategic Plan Costa Rica 2050 will constitute 
that must be avoided in order not to divert from the country’s goal. This  a new set of climate and development policies aimed at transforming 
time horizon does not imply a postponing of actions, but a prioritization. Costa Rican economic, social and territorial models. It will seek to create 
decarbonization and resilience opportunities that will facilitate the 
This approach is different from the classic prognosis typically carried out 
effecting of a prosperous, sustainable and inclusive Bicentennial Costa 
by l public management processes. The Plan is, hence, a strategic and 
Rica.
pragmatic input for the President and his Governing Council. As such, 
it is a starting point to provide feedback on short-, medium- and long- Carlos Manuel Rodríguez 
term planning processes that will be promoted by the Government. The  Minister of Environment and Energy
planning and elaboration process of the Decarbonization Plan will thus 
immediately contribute to the elaboration of the key milestones in the 
National Development and Public Investments Plan (PNDIP 2018-2022) 
that have to be implemented during this four-year period. This exercise 
has allowed an alignment with and improvement of the consistency of 
the PNDIP and the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) – with 
the latter being defined as the commitment presented by the country 
to the international community in the promotion of goals set by the 
Paris Agreement.
The Plan will also serve as a starting point for the elaboration of the 
long-term plan called "Strategic Plan Costa Rica 2050". This Plan will 
be  led  by  the  Ministry  of  National  Planning  and  Economic  Policy 
(MIDEPLAN) and will allow a fostering of the vision pertaining to the 
economic development model of Costa Rica by 2050. This process will 
deepen quantitative and qualitative scenarios and be facilitated through 
consultations with various actors from the private sector, Academy, and 
the citizens.
It is crucial to read this Plan in conjunction with other climate policies 
on emissions reduction and adaptation to climate impacts. Given the 
country's high vulnerability to such impacts, it is worth highlighting that 
the National Adaptation Policy (NAP) that was published in May 2018, as 
well as the National Adaptation Plan that is currently being elaborated, 
will provide the country with tools to improve resilience in key areas – 
and this would include: infrastructure, productive and fishing systems, 
tourism, water resources management, biodiversity and health.
2Section I: 
Executive Summary
Costa  Rica  aspires  to  be  a  modern,  green  and  emission-free  The Paris Agreement sets a global milestone, and Costa Rica can 
economy - and to strengthen its leadership - In 2021, the country  be a pioneer in this new international system - By establishing a 
will celebrate its Bicentennial, and the current administration has  goal that limits the increase in temperature to a range between 1.5 and 
proposed to lay the foundations of a new Costa Rican economy of  2°C, the Paris Agreement globalized a new logic of decarbonization: 
the 21st century. In his inaugural speech on May 8th, President  Parties commit to zero-emissions by the second half of the century. 
Carlos Alvarado expressed the aspiration of the country becoming  While  most  of  the  national  commitments  to  the  Agreement  (or 
a  decarbonized  bicentennial  Costa  Rica.  ("Decarbonization  is  the  "NDCs") propose emissions reductions that are not up to the climate 
greatest mission of our generation, and Costa Rica must be among  challenge, Costa Rica committed itself to a goal consistent with the 
the first countries of the world to achieve it, if not the first"). Among  decarbonization objectives of the Agreement. In this international 
the major changes facing the world economy, including the "fourth  context, President Alvarado's call to lead has a practical meaning: Costa 
industrial  revolution",  the  need  to  move  towards  a  sustainable  Rica may be a decarbonization "laboratory" for the world to reinforce 
economy,    one  with  an  economic  development  approach  that  what has been learned to date, and to progress in areas where others 
does not damage the natural capital, has been highlighted; this  seek innovative examples. Now, the decarbonizing of the Costa Rican 
will also inform infrastructure investments to remain competitive.  economy will require a strong planning effort, particularly one with a 
While the transition to a zero-emissions economy requires a deep  long-term vision and actions in several stages.
transformation, it is worth noting that Costa Rica has already made   
significant progress during the previous decades, including an almost  Developing  a  decarbonization  plan  requires  new  planning 
emissions-free electricity grid and very low rates of deforestation.  methodologies to achieve transformational changes - Through 
Hence, decarbonizing is not a new concept for the country, even if  the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the scientific 
the progress made to date has happened under a different name.  community tells us that global emissions in 2050 should be net zero 
to reach the global goal of decarbonization and the 1.5°C target. This 
Costa Rica commits to becoming a decarbonized economy with  process must be achieved alongside a growing world economy: if the 
net-zero emissions by 2050 - This vision is the long-term goal  economy triples (an annual growth of 3% is expected for 40 years), 
underlying this National Decarbonization Plan. The target is consistent  the emissions intensity per Gross Domestic Product (GDP) should 
with the best available science, which have warned of the dangers of  fall by more than 80%. It is clear that, despite the uncertainties of 
an increase of the average global temperature beyond 1.5°C above  these estimates, the required change cannot be achieved through 
pre-industrial levels. This plan is consistent with that temperature  incremental  adjustments  alone,  but  will  require  substantive 
target.  technological, institutional, and economic changes. Thus, most of 
  the  energy  and  transport  sectors  activities,  among  others,  must 
3be carried out with technologies different from the ones currently  example is the shift from coal, bunker, fuel oil, or diesel, to natural 
in use. This exemplifies the scale of the planning challenge that  gas  in  electricity  generation  or  industry),  will  represent “lock-in” 
underlies a decarbonization strategy and the need to implement new  emissions (or committed emissions) and should be avoided, not only 
methodologies to do address it. because they delay the transformation, but also due to the fact that 
  they will compete for financing with truly decarbonized activities and 
Decarbonization planning requires establishing clear long-term  ultimately result in a higher overall cost of decarbonization.
goal which makes it possible to identify a general pathway and   
then deduce the necessary actions in the short- and medium- The national economy has the structural forces - in education, 
term to reach the goal. - Planning for decarbonization guides us  openness and natural capital - to face change. However historical 
in the process of establishing goals towards achieving it in every  shortcomings in infrastructure and fiscal constraints can slow the 
sector  between  today  and  2050;  and  to  generate  narratives  of  transition - Macroeconomic stability and openness have made Costa 
sectoral change though technological transformation, shifting from  Rica into a country that is increasingly oriented towards the export of 
the existing state to the desired one. Based on the above, the work  goods and services. The country has been efficiently converting its GDP 
begins by determining what changes - institutional, market, price,  growth into social progress, while the investment in natural capital 
regulatory, among others - must be realized to fulfill the trajectory  has protected biodiversity and increased income from ecotourism. 
and allow it to permeate into the daily logic of the citizens, businesses,  On the other hand, decades of little investment in infrastructure limit 
and  investors.  Simultaneously,  just  transition  measures  must  be  urban and rural mobility. In the absence of a strong public transport 
implemented so that people, communities and businesses that have  system, there is an increase of carbon emissions due to the burning of 
to reorient their activities have the necessary support to do so. The  fossil fuels intensifying in the wake of a growing vehicle fleet.
actions are presented in the three stages: foundations (2018-2022),   
inflection (2023-2030) and massive deployment (2031-2050), each  Of the economic sectors, the critical emissions come from the 
with different levels of detail. transport sector, which faces a backlog of infrastructure and 
  standards. The electric sector is already zero-emissions and can 
Thirty years is a short time for a transformation of this magnitude.  lead the change but will need to reduce in its costs - The vehicle 
As such, no time can  be wasted: the actions that must be avoided  fleet, dominated by private vehicles, has tripled in the last 30 years 
have to be identified – To do so, it must be highlighted that many  without  proportional  investment  in  infrastructure,  illustrates  the 
investments have a lifespan that goes from 15 years (a car) to 40  country’s transport issues. Urban public transport suffers from routes 
years  (a  thermoelectric  generator). Thus,  the  next  investment  or  that do not correspond to the demand, leading to a greater use of 
purchase made in an economic sector might still be operating by  private vehicles, which, in turn, creates an increasing demand for 
2050. This means that some investment options, while able to reduce  gasoline imports. Transport is the sector with both the highest and 
emissions in the short-term, should not be carried out because they  fastest rising emission levels. In contrast, the electricity sector, which is 
would prevent the fulfillment of the final goal. In other words, there  another major emitter for many countries, is nearly 100% renewable. 
are investments that will not achieve the reductions in the scale  This puts the electrification of transport - public and private - as a clear 
required to decarbonize the economy during their lifespan. These  measure of decarbonization, which must be achieved by keeping 
investments, such as technologies that partially reduce the emissions  electrical generation clean and affordable.
from  burning  fossil  fuels  instead  of  totally  eliminating  them  (an   
4Planning decarbonization involves every sector of the economy.  Economy Strategy, e) “Just transition" Labor Strategies, f) Inclusion, 
The plan proposal is structured along 10 decarbonization axes  Human Rights and Gender Equality, g) Metric and open data systems 
that are derived from the pattern of the country’s greenhouse  to evaluate the goals progress, and h) Education and Culture Strategy 
gas emissions - The axes correspond with the four major emission  that contributes to the transition to a Bicentennial Costa Rica leader 
sources: energy (transport - collective, private and freight, electric  in the substitution of fossil fuels with renewable energy. Additionally, 
system,  residential  and  commercial  sector  and  industrial  sector),  an impact analysis was advised to be carried out to support the 
industrial processes, residues, agriculture, forestry and other land  management of the dimensions: a cost-benefit analysis of the main 
uses (cattle, agriculture and forests). For each axis, the Plan suggests  actions to identify the reforms’ positive and negative impacts – along 
a vision of transformation , as well as the measures for change, which  with suggesting measures to minimize or avoid the negative aspects, 
are divided into short-, medium- and long-term. while identifying the escalation of the development benefits that are 
  associated with decarbonization. More particularly, to analyze both 
For  each  axis,  the  Plan  contemplates  policy  packages  that  the impacts of decarbonization in the labor market and the best 
combine concrete planning, institutional or regulatory measures,  practices of a "just transition" towards the fourth industrial revolution 
project  implementation,  access  to  financing,  ensuring  citizen  and decarbonization, is offered.
support, and avoiding lock-in - Decarbonization may face a series   
of barriers and in order to overcome them, the improvement areas  Given the need to start the decarbonization pathway with concrete 
must combine sets of complementary measures that can ensure  activities, 5 priorities for action are identified from the sets of 
a  change  in  a  coordinated  and  sequential  way.  Detailed  policy  sectoral actions, and cross-cutting measures, to be implemented 
packages are presented for each of the 10 axes in coordinated and  from 2018: a) Triggering the transformation of public transport, b) 
orderly arrangements (which are complemented by implementation  Accelerating and scaling up transformation actions of the higher-
schedules ranging in the short-, medium-, and long-term, and can be  emitting activities of the agricultural sector c) Laying the foundations 
found in the annex). of the electrification of the economy - not only in the transport sector 
  but also in the industrial sector, d) Avoiding technological pathways 
Decarbonization planning requires a clear model of governance,  in energy and transport that can contribute to a partial reduction of 
cross-cutting measures and impacts identification. - Defining the  emissions but do not lead to "zero-emissions", e) Starting the process of 
institutional requirements of decarbonization is crucial to responding  two cross-cutting reforms in 2018, without which the decarbonization 
with  certainty  to  the  question:  what  instance  is  responsible  for  of the Costa Rican economy will be unfeasible: The structural reform 
decarbonizing the economy? Moreover, cross-cutting strategies must  for a new national institutionality that will lay the foundations for a 
be explicit in order to enhance change. Hence, eight cross-cutting areas  new system of sustainable consumption and production; and a green 
were identified: a) Comprehensive Reform for the New Institutionality  tax reform to promote actions towards sustainable development and 
of the Bicentennial, b) Green Tax Reform, c) Funding Strategy and  growth without emissions, thereby reducing the negative externalities 
Investment  Attraction,  d)  Digitalization  and  Knowledge-based  that deteriorate the natural capital.
5Section 2 - 
Costa Rica aspires to have a green, resilient and equitable 
economy without emissions.
Costa Rica will celebrate its Bicentennial in 2021, and the Alvarado  world to achieve it, if not the first." However, the leadership gaps in 
administration has set put to lay the foundations of a new Costa Rican  decarbonization are profound - there is resistance to change - and 
economy, one in tune with the twenty-first century. A successful  while the country can fill this gap with pioneering actions, it is not 
transition  will  have  to  take  advantage  of  the  new  opportunities  fortuitously that his speech had an international resonance.
presented to create prosperity, face risks and successfully navigate the 
deep transformations that are coming along with the "fourth industrial  Costa Rica as a leader in decarbonization
revolution" - a revolution accelerated by a fusion of technologies that 
will combine the physical, digital, and biological spheres1.
The  Paris  Agreement  globalized  a  new  logic  of  decarbonization, 
 
a term that refers to the process of separating economic growth 
One of the great tasks of Bicentennial Costa Rica will be to modernize 
from increased emissions, in order to achieve a balance between 
the  infrastructure  so  that  economic  growth  is  achieved  without 
emissions  and  carbon  sequestration  that  guarantees  life  on  the 
increasing pollution or damaging the natural capital. This significant 
planet. Although the term is still not well known outside expert 
Costa Rican transformation has to take place in an international 
circles, the actions needed to achieve decarbonization in certain sub 
context that already recognizes the need to make an unprecedented 
sectors are not new to Costa Rica. Indeed, decarbonization has been 
transition  from  a  global  economy  anchored  in  fossil  fuels  -  and 
successfully implemented for decades, especially in the electricity and 
vulnerable to climate impacts - towards  a zero-emissions economy 
natural resources sectors, although it was not called as such at the 
driven by renewable energy and resilient to the impacts of extreme 
time. Guided by the search for energy security, investments in local 
climate conditions.
renewable sources to generate electricity have already been made for 
 
decades. Today, the Costa Rican electricity system is one of the few 
No country has the exact formula to carry out this transformation. 
decarbonized systems in the world: In 2017, 99.5% of the electricity 
In his inaugural speech on May 8th 2018, President Carlos Alvarado 
in the country was generated without using fossil fuels - the highest 
set  forth  the  aspiration  to  become  a  decarbonized  and  resilient 
percentage  in  30  years.  Another  big  bet  -  forest  protection  and 
bicentennial Costa Rica. The world took notice of the specific call to 
payment for ecosystem services - sought to protect biodiversity. This 
make Costa Rica a leader: "Decarbonization is the great task of our 
investment allowed for Costa Rican historical protection of forests 
generation, and Costa Rica must be among the first countries in the 
to remain a central piece of the country's biodiversity and climate 
commitments. . Both the economy and the population grew while 
_______________________________
large emissions in the electric and forestry sectors were avoided.
1 Ver “The Fourth Industrial Revolution: what it means, how to respond”  World Economic 
Forum    (2016)  https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/01/the-fourth-industrial-  
revolution-what-it-means-and-how-to-respond/ That is why President Alvarado's call makes sense for Costa Rica. The 
6process of decarbonization is at a stage in our country that some  bicentennial. Disruptions will also occur. Thus, this transition must be 
countries aspire to have in 30 years. Consolidating Costa Rica as a  gestated with the vision of building an inclusive and socially fair Costa 
leader in decarbonization adds value to the country, first and foremost,  Rica. However, the country cannot allow itself to be left behind, as this 
and contributes to the efforts of the international community. In Costa  would diminish future competitiveness.
Rica, the world benefits from having a "decarbonization laboratory” 
that can reinforce what has been learned to date and demonstrate  Costa Rica towards the Paris Agreement
progress in other sectors, in which other countries are looking for 
successful examples that they can emulate.
Most countries have announced their plans to comply with the Paris 
 
Agreement. These  plans  (or  nationally  determined  contributions, 
The green economy goes beyond the climate agenda. However, it is 
"NDCs") are, in general, of insufficient ambition to achieve the goal 
worth noting that the Paris Agreement - with its clear goals an   d    b  i nding 
of containing the global temperature increase well below 2°C with 
nature – left a definitive imprint in the approach to decarbonization: it 
respect to pre-industrial average and aiming toward 1.5°C. This is 
is no longer a question of discretionary commitments or incremental 
due to the fact that, in general, these plans have been developed 
improvements. The obligations, ratified by the world’s Congresses 
with an incremental approach, rather than a transformative one. The 
and Parliaments, transcend the improvements scope applied to the 
mitigation goals of several Latin American countries - reducing 20-
released technologies (for example, the measures for "cleaner" fossil 
30% against an inertial scenario2 - imply that emission levels of 2030 
fuels). A major transformation is thus necessary (for example, this 
could be comparable to the current ones. While this undoubtedly 
could include setting a deadline to stop  operating coal plants or a 
represents an important effort to stop the increase in emissions, it is 
date from which only zero emission buses should be allowed).
insufficient.
 
 
The country will not be alone. Being a pioneer will have benefits. Many 
In the framework of the previous analysis, compliance with the current 
countries, cities, and companies have already initiated innovative 
NDCs will be problematic in many countries as it will create an important 
decarbonization processes in specific sectors, and many technologies 
lock-in3 that will hinder the Agreement’s compliance. Fortunately, the 
are progressing faster than expected. There are opportunities to 
Agreement includes an ambition mechanism that asks for NDCs to be 
attract investment to the country. There is evidence of job creation 
updated on a regular basis. In addition, governments have to strive 
which, in addition to the reality of the fourth industrial revolution, will 
to formulate "long-term, low emission development strategies" that 
force Costa Rica to examine new parameters to prepare a winning 
will comply with the Agreement. As such, if countries carry out these 
workforce for the coming economy: digital, green and resilient. What 
strategies with decarbonization planning methodologies, like the one 
jobs will be necessary in this type of economy? This question will be 
outlined in section 5, the steps to be followed in the short-, medium-, 
one of the greatest of our society and one of the pillars that will be 
and long-term will be clear, and these countries will be able to update 
integrated into the education of the new generation of children of the 
their NDCs by 2020 to better align themselves with the goal of the 
Agreement4.
_______________________________
2   In other words, it would be certain if no measure of decarbonization is adopted
3     Referring to the compromised emissions which are anchored in the economy
4    Article 4, paragraph 19 of the Paris Agreement
7Figure 1: Most governmental goals are incremental, and their sum is insufficient to comply with the 
Paris Agreement Goal. 
Source: Synthesis report on the accumulated effects of the INDCs, United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC) Secretary, 2nd of May 2016
In this context, Costa Ricans should be proud to have already offered a national contribution 
compatible with the goal of the Paris Agreement. That being said, organizing and implementing 
the next versions of the NDCs will require a strong planning effort, as part of a long-term strategy. 
This plan is the first step of that process in terms of mitigation, which will be complemented with 
the National Adaptation Plan in terms of adaptation and with the Costa Rica Strategic Plan 2050 as a 
general framework. The next section explains what decarbonization planning is and emphasizes the 
goal of transformation that provides the basis for its methodology.
8Section 3: 
The Costa Rican economy and public policy created a pattern of 
emissions that reflects great successes, but also new challenges
The economic structure and public policies determine the emission sources  emphasis on the attribute of “green country” as a differentiator.
of a country. Therefore, there is no generic formula for the decarbonization   
of an economy. In fact, as previously mentioned, the generation of  However, the economic model also faces vulnerabilities in several fields. In 
electricity from fossil fuels is a large part of emissions in most countries.In  the short-term, an unsustainable fiscal deficit requires an urgent political 
Costa Rica, however,  this is not the case and the biggest portion of carbon  agreement in order to carry out a reform of the fiscal system. Without it, 
emissions originate in the transport sector, a fact which has implications  employment and production will be impacted. Another vulnerability 
for the national strategy.Understanding the Costa Rican greenhouse gas  lies in the structural disconnection between growth and employment 
emissions inventory and its relation to the national economic structure is  generation, as successful sectors with external orientation do not generate 
absolutely necessary. enough linkages with local sectors. The unemployment rate is currently 
  at its highest in the last three decades. Moreover, the challenge of low 
Our economy is open and increasingly oriented towards the export of  productivity of the economy remains unsolved.
goods and services. Macroeconomic stability - a low inflation and a stable   
exchange rate - and a competitive international export sector are among  The large investments in education, health and natural capital contrasts 
its major strengths. The country has historically been one of the most  with the low investment in infrastructure (a problem which will be 
efficient in converting its GDP growth into social progress: other countries  difficult to correct in the current context of acute fiscal deficit). As such, 
have required higher levels of income per capita to achieve the level of  the infrastructure deficit undermines the foundations of the economy 
social development achieved in Costa Rica. In addition, investments in  in general and the green economy in particular, as it has resulted in an 
health and education have also been significant. inefficient  and  unsustainable  transportation  model  that  generates 
  congestion and pollution. Despite great advances in access to potable 
The focus on the sale of services has led to more than US$ 3,600 million in  water and sewerage, the wastewater treatment infrastructure has been 
revenue from tourism in 2016, accounting for 45% of all service exports, a  neglected, a situation which if further compounded by urban and real 
higher income generation than from the country’s main export products  estate growth - as well as by tourism. In addition, another infrastructure 
such as bananas, business services and medical products5. gap is the poor management of solid waste.
   
The investment in natural capital – with a high conservation of biodiversity  The vulnerability of the infrastructure in the face of climate impacts also 
and national parks – has been rewarded by the income from ecotourism  exacerbates  the  above-mentioned  challenges.  In  2017,  the  General 
services and a country brand titled “Essential Costa Rica”, with great  Comptroller of the Republic estimated that the cost of attending extreme 
weather events will be approximately 2.5% of the GDP in 2025. A successful 
_______________________________ green economy will indubitably require an infrastructure investment 
5   Estado de la Nación 2017 of the Estado de la Nación Program, Costa Rica
9approach with the dual objective of simultaneously improves the national 
FIGURE 2:  Sectoral contribution to the carbonization in Costa Rica 
economy, along with environmental and climatic performances6. The 
based on the 2012 Inventory.
decarbonization  agenda  has  to  contribute  towards  generating  new 
resources and new "green" jobs. This focus is developed in section 6. 
Decarbonization challenges in Costa Rica
Greenhouse gas emissions in Costa Rica are increasing. It has been 
estimated that if measures are not taken, Costa Rica's emissions will 
increase annually by 2.4%. Between 2015 and 2030, emissions will 
have increased by 60%, and would have increased by 132% in 2050, 
reaching a level of 29.6 million tons of CO2 equivalent7.
 
According to the data of the national inventory of greenhouse gas 
emissions and carbon absorption, emissions were equivalent 11.2 
million tons of CO2 in 2012, (compared to 9.6 million in 2010 and 7.6 
million in 2005)8.
_______________________________
6   A set of actions to close this gap are elaborated in “Bridging Costa Rica’s Green 
Growth Gap” (2015) GIZ, ODI & CDKN.
7  Referring to “Opciones de Reducción de Emisiones de Gases de Efecto de Invernadero en 
Costa Rica: Análisis Sectorial Potencial de Mitigación y Costos de Abatimiento 2015-2050” 
(2015) Luis Rivera, Germán Obando y Francisco Sancho. Report prepared by Dirección 
de Cambio Climático of the MINAE of Costa Rica with the support of the Partnership 
for Market Readiness y ESMAP
  https://www.researchgate.net/publication/308611634_Opciones_de_
Reduccion_de_Emisiones_de_Gases_de_Efecto_Invernadero_en_Costa_Rica_
Analisis_Sectorial_Potencial_de_Mitigacion_y_Costos_de_Abatimiento_2015-2050 
8  The official inventory can be access here: 
      https://unfccc.int/files/ghg_data/ghg_data_unfccc/ghg_profiles/ Source: National Inventory of Greenhouses Gases and Carbon Absorption 2012
application/pdf/cri_ghg_profile.pdf
1100HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA
The following segment presents the inventory categories, and the  operators’ standards (for example, the absence of electronic payment 
challenges  within  each  category  associated  with  the  economic  and exclusive lanes). According to the analysis of the Integrated Plan 
activities.  for Sustainable Urban Mobility (PIMUS)9, there are 252 bus routes 
in the Greater Metropolitan Area (GMA), mostly within the center-
periphery, served by 41 companies and 1,842 buses. A, a bus trip has 
on average duration that is 70% greater than a car trip (given that 
40% of trips require a transfer, usually remote, to which waiting times 
Emissions Source 1: 
are added). This inefficiency is explained by the lack of integrated 
Energy 
payment, inadequate routes that don’t cater to the demand, and an 
HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA
uncoordinated system. Achieving improvements in public transport 
The  carbonization  of  the  Costa  Rican  would reflect democratic improvements, as the services of large and 
economy is primarily driven by the burning  socially more vulnerable populations are improved.
of  fuels  of  private,  public,  and  freight 
transportation. Between 2000 and 2010, the value of oil imports as  Light-duty  vehicles  fleet   - The 
a percentage of the GDP doubled. Diesel accounts for almost 40% of  growth of the vehicular fleet in Costa Rica 
Costa Rica’s hydrocarbon purchases. This transport model carbonizes  has led to a high dependence on fossil-
the country. The carbon generated by the combustion of gasoline and  fuels.  In  twenty  years  (1996-2016),  the 
diesel growing by 43% between 2002 and 2012. country went from purchasing 6,424,561 
barrels of oil to 20,208,666, representing 
a costly increase in both the oil bill and 
polluting emissions. The country’s fleet  is old: vehicles are 15 years 
Public transport - As the economy  old on average (in comparison to Europe and the United States of 
HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA grew,  the  importance  of  private  America (USA), which are 7.4 and 11.6 years old, respectively). The 
transport  has  risen.  The  country  went  private fleet consumes 50% of the total energy used in the transport 
from 418,048 units in 1994 to 1,347,000  sector, as compared to the 10.13% consumed by collective transport 
in  2015,  of  which  834,000  are  private/ - which mobilizes more people. The burning of fossil fuels not only 
light-duty  vehicles.  The  investment  in  increases the carbonization of the country, but also damages air 
public transport infrastructure has been low, given that most of the  quality PM2.5 levels exceed the internationally recommended levels 
budget of the Ministry of Public Works and Transport are invested in  and the NO2 levels at the GMA and exceed the limits of the World 
roads and in supporting the use of private vehicles. Public transport  Health Organization (WHO) in many of the locations where it was 
governance is weak and has prevented the improvement of bus  measured.
_______________________________
9 See the documents generated in the framework of the IDB GEF Sustainable 
Mobility Project for the Integral Plan for Sustainable Urban Mobility (PIMUS) for the 
Metropolitan Area of San Jose, Costa Rica, of MINAE, Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Settlements and MIDEPLAN (2017)  http://pimuspreguntas.com/preguntas 
11FIGURE 3: Oil barrel annually imported in Costa Rica (1985-2015) that regulates transport emissions since 2016, as the sector has expressed 
concern  regarding  competitiveness  loss  against  Central  American 
companies that do not have equivalent environmental requirements.
 
It is important to mention that a large part of freight transport, mainly 
the heavy one, passes through Central American regulations and plans, 
so the challenge of decarbonization and decontamination this sector 
– as opposed to the decarbonization axis 1 and 2 - will require efforts 
HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA to modernize the region. The Costa Rican freight transport fleet is the 
oldest among national sub-fleets registered in the Vehicles Technical 
Revision (RITEVE) yearbook (Figure 4) with an average of 22 years old, a 
6-year average above the average of all vehicles and higher than in other 
countries (for example, 12 years old in Europe and 14 years old in the USA).
FIGURE 4: Average age of annually revised vehicles
Source: RECOPE
The cargo transport - heavy and 
light -  In an open economy, the system 
involved for cargo transportation in products 
distribution is fundamental for the country's 
competitiveness. However, the sector also 
generates negative externalities given that urban areas are impacted by 
freight transport, especially the GMA, from the cargo transit that leaves, or 
returns to this area. The generation and attraction of the freight transport 
in the San José Metropolitan Area mainly originates from industries, 
logistics centers, urban centers and entry or exit points of merchandise, 
such as ports or international crossings. There is an accelerated increase of 
emissions from the combustion of diesel, and a lack of national regulation 
for this sector in terms of carbon emissions and short-lived pollutants 
(such as PM, NOx), resulting in public health issues and premature deaths. 
Of the total energy consumption of the transport sector in Costa Rica, 
36.5% originates from freight transport. Although the sector represents 
Source: Yearbook  of  the Vehicle Technical  Revision.  2017,  MOPT-Riteve  (2018) 
15% of the vehicle fleet, it is excluded from the obligations of the Decree 
(elaborated by Ana Lucía Moya, DCC)
1122HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA
The electricity system - covers as well as the standards of the apparatus used. Significant 
Costa  Rica  presents  a  significant  advances  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  regulations  in 
advantage: the electricity matrix is based  these areas will be required in order to influence the markets more 
on  renewable  sources  and  diversified  effectively and to begin to reverse current inefficiencies. In addition, 
(hydro, wind, geothermal, solar, biomass),  it will be necessary to leave a modular thinking to move to an integral 
which  allows  electricity  supply  to  have  design of functional systems.
virtually zero-emissions. During the last four years, the percentage 
of renewable generation has exceeded 98% of power supply. These  Industry - This sector is described in the following section:
HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA
circumstances facilitate the transition from the use of hydrocarbons 
in the transport, industrial and other sectors to the use of electricity, 
Source of emissions 2: Industry
thereby contributing to the decarbonization of the country's energy 
sector.
  Energy in industry - The country 
The country has an electricity coverage of 99.4%, and a robust, reliable,  has  to  take  advantage  of  its  relative 
and flexible electricity system. strengths in education, governance, and 
One of the challenges would be in guaranteeing the electricity supply  macroeconomic  stability  to  encourage 
keeps competitive prices, while maintaining a renewable, efficient  investments  and  operations  in  high 
and reliable matrix. Therefore, a restructuring of  the system has to  value-added industrial sectors, leading to 
be promoted in order to allow it to face new challenges that arise  sustained leadership within Latin American  
from the demand increase, as transportation and other sectors are  in new and more efficient manufacturing models. However, to stop 
HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA
electrified. and reverse emission increases from the sector, energy uses that have 
  the technical option to be electrified should implement it, as this 
The configuration of the electrical system in 2050 will have to be  would bring benefits ranging from the increased competitiveness of 
characterized by its sustainability, flexibility and "intelligence", and  renewable electric energy that will be achieved in the line of action 4 
through  allowing  the  integration  of  storage  systems,  distributed  of decarbonization. Simultaneously, alternative sources to fossil fuels, 
generation and demand management. such as biomass resulting from agricultural processes, have to be 
sought to supply energy for the processes that cannot be electrified. 
The commercial and residential  As a first step, a reduction in investment and the use of fossil fuel-
based technologies has to begin from this point forth.
HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA sector -In these sectors, the emissions 
arise from the daily use of a series of 
services  that  serve  towards  adapting 
Processes  in  industry  –  Several 
spaces  to  our  use.  It  is  necessary  to 
industries  produce  greenhouse  gases 
profoundly  modify  how  we  invest  in 
due to the transformation processes that 
lighting, ventilation, air conditioning, refrigeration, cooking, and 
they entail and independently from their 
other technologies related to our building use. The first step will be to 
energy  use.  A  typical  case  is  cement, 
make these buildings more efficient, which depend on the buildings 
13HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA
HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA
which in addition to requiring energy to burn raw material, releases  Source of emissions 4:  
CO2  through  the  chemical  process  that  is  carried  out.  Avoiding 
Agriculture,  Forestry  and  Other 
emissions of this nature has technological solutions on occasion, and 
HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA
several  sectors  have  implemented  innovation  programs  globally.  Land Uses (AFOLU)11 
Simultaneously, there must be willingness to replace processes, and 
even products, such as wood in construction or reinforced resins in  Agriculture - In the agricultural sector, 
automotive applications, to reduce the global demand for certain  greenhouse gas emissions mainly come 
materials. Finally, recognizing that the industrial sector should have  from  four  productive  activities:  coffee,  sugarcane,  and  musaceas 
some emissions allocation in the long-term inventory while these  (predominantly bananas) in relation to nitrous oxide emissions; and 
transitions are gradually handled is necessary, since the pathway to  rice cultivation, for methane emissions. From a productive landscape 
zero-emissions is less clear for this sector than it is for others, such as  point of view, this sector has the capacity to absorb, capture and 
in the case of electricity generation. conserve carbon through agroforestry systems, precision agriculture, 
and forest conservation. The agricultural sector has taken a leadership 
role in the development of climate strategies, as it is also one of the 
Source of emissions 3:  most vulnerable sectors to climate change impacts. The challenge is 
to move from actions focused on two subsectors (coffee and livestock) 
Waste10
to a sectoral approach (the set of agricultural and livestock activities). 
A pioneering step has been seen in the adoption of the sectoral 
Waste  - Waste management in Costa  agreement on emission reduction adopted between the Ministry of 
Rica  employs landfills that lead to the  Agriculture and Livestock (MAG) and the MINAE, which was signed at 
generation of methane from organic waste. The separation, recovery  the beginning of 2018. It’s biggest challenge is its operationalization, 
and treatment of organic waste with techniques such as compost  especially in terms of escalation, metrics and financing.
requires organization, scale and coordination between the different 
municipalities and central level actors (such as the Ministry of Health  Livestock  -  In  the  livestock  sector, 
(MINSALUD),  Ministry  of  Environment  and  Energy  (MINAE)  and 
greenhouse  gas  emissions  stem  from 
Municipal Development and Advisory Institute (IFAM), along with 
enteric  fermentation  and  excreta 
changes in citizen behavior required to achieve this at a manageable 
handling,  and  this  corresponds  to 
cost. It will also be crucial to consolidating the management of 
methane  emissions.  To  a  lesser  extent, 
sanitary landfills to encourage the capture of methane either through 
pastures fertilization, a primary but not 
active or passive techniques.
exclusive practice for cattle bovine milk, 
has an impact on nitrous oxide emissions. It is a sector that has also 
the capacity to absorb, capture and conserve carbon to some extent, 
_______________________________ through the management of pastures, soil conservation, forests and 
10  Although it is an important issue in Costa Rica and for the green growth agenda,  silvopastoral systems. This sub-sector has a Low-Carbon Livestock 
it does not address the issue of wastewater treatment since they represent relatively 
Strategy and a program called the Nationally Appropriate Mitigation 
small emissions.
Actions (or NAMAs) implemented in its pilot phase. Its main challenge 
11  AFOLU: Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use
1144HIDRÓGENO: PROPULSIÓN ELÉCTRICA
is to eliminate the set of barriers (scaling of the NAMA in its next  resource  constraints  and  public  management.  According  to  the 
phases). General Comptroller of the Republic, the majority of public entities 
associated with the protection of biodiversity do not have adequate 
Institutional Performance Index ratings, except for the National Forest 
Deforestation and Absorption  Financing Fund (FONAFIFO). As the threats to biodiversity increase 
-  Historically,  Costa  Rica  has  operated  over the years, a gap is created, and accordingly, investments must 
its  national  system  of  protected  wild  be carried out in a better institutional management context - one 
areas  and  program  of  Payments  for  that guarantees the protection of the natural capital. The forest plays 
Environmental  Services  (PES),  which,  in  a vital role in guaranteeing the provision of ecosystem goods and 
totality, covers 35% of the country and  services, and also functions as a net emission sink for the country (7.4 
70% of the forests. The achievements in  MtCO2eq according to the official inventory). Consequently, it would 
the field of ecosystem and biodiversity  be necessary to maintain and even increase the level of forest cover to 
conservation must be sustained over time in a context of profound  at least 60% of the national territory.
15Section 4: 
The goal of decarbonization planning is to go beyond an environmental agenda: 
it is to transform the economy
The magnitude of the challenge assumed by the world upon the entry  possible to reach zero. In practice, this means that each sector will 
into force of the Paris Agreement calls for a structural transformation  be transformed toward  zero emissions, yet at different speeds. For 
of economic activities. This transformation is also  a great opportunity  example, the Costa Rican electric sector has almost achieved zero 
for boosting the economy and to generate prosperity under green  emissions, the transportation sector will achieve it as it adopts zero-
and circular growth approaches. Today, the great imperative in Costa  emissions technologies that are already commercially viable, and 
Rica - due to the Paris Agreement and the call from President Alvarado  the agricultural sector will probably be low in emissions for several 
– would be to transform the emissions pattern of the economy into a  decades  while  technical  and  technological  changes  continue  to 
net-zero emissions, or negative emissions (i.e., removals) society, in  improve.
sectors where it is possible - and very low emissions where it is not 
Table 1
The decarbonization logic of the Paris Agreement 
Ratification. In December 2015, the Paris Agreement was adopted, which entered into force in the record time of less than a year after. In July 2018, 179 of the 
197 signatory parties of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change have ratified the Agreement, and collectively and bindingly committed 
themselves to maintain the increase of the Earth's average temperature to 1.5 °C and 2 °C above the pre-industrial era. 
The goal of 2°C and the year 2050. To understand what the fulfillment of this international commitment implies, it must be remembered that climate change 
is the result of the effects of the greenhouse gases (GHGs) that is emitted into the atmosphere by human activity. Since the already accumulated emissions have caused a significant 
increase in temperature with respect to its value in the pre-industrial era, it is now necessary to rapidly reduce emissions to stop the warming process. Concretely, the IPCC has 
established that in order to have a 66% probability that the average temperature does not exceed 2°C of the pre-industrial era, global emissions will have to be nil in the second half 
of the century, and approximately between 40% and 70% smaller in the year 2050 than they were in 2010. 
Intensity emissions of the GDP. This reduction is undoubtedly very important in absolute terms, since emissions have almost continuously increased since the industrial era, being 
driven by industrialization and urbanization of the increasing population and national GDP. However, the emissions reduction required by the Paris Agreement in relation to GDPs is 
even more ambitious. If we assume that the global economy of 2050 could have a GDP of three times its value of 2010, and requires the total emissions be half its amount, this would 
imply an approximate reduction of five sixths (that is, 83%) of the emission intensity per unit of GDP.
More information on the science requirements to mitigate climate change in IPCC document: IPCC Fifth Assessment Report, Working Group III, Summary for Policymakers
1166Therefore, it is necessary to apply a planning methodology in order  to  measures of change that must be executed between 2018 and 2050, 
guide the transformation as well as the consequent set of actions in  and is organized in three phases (explained in section 5). Additionally, 
the short, medium and long-term. This document lays the foundations  actions that should be avoided due to them being incompatible with 
for the "Planning of decarbonization" in Costa Rica, anchored in  the decarbonization required in the Paris Agreement are identified.
a vision of transformation of each sectoral axis that defines the 
TABLE 2
Fulfilling a goal by 2050 does not mean postponing actions, but
 developing fundamental transformations with urgency
With the entry into force of the Agreement, the question for society, companies, and governments - including local ones – would be: what changes will be necessary to reduce 
emissions by 80 to 90% per unit of GDP worldwide? Simultaneously, it is crucial to evaluate the difficulties involve in achieving it. How much investment will be necessary and who 
will carry it out? It will also be crucial to improve the capacity to account for the benefits and costs associated with these measures in order to make a balance and identify a strategy 
to manage the impacts.
The sectorial analysis of the changes suggests that between 70 and 80% of global emissions in recent decades come from energy consumption – and these come, for example, 
from the need to generate electricity, to boost transport, industrial and commercial activities and to provide heating during winter. Technological options to reduce emissions from 
energy to almost zero (with possible exceptions in industry, transport and aviation) already exist. Non-energy emissions come from agriculture, livestock activity, forests and soils 
management, industrial processes, and waste management. While there is a potential for significant reduction and research to improve practices are making remarkable progress in 
the agriculture and livestock sectors, there are still no technologies and practices available reduce emissions to the level of almost zero in a similar fashion to what has been achieved 
in the energy sector.
Given the above, decarbonizing the energy sectors as extensively as possible is crucial in order to reach zero-emissions in several sectors to ensure that the agreed limits in the future 
is not exceeded, since the other sectors have no technical potential to achieve the 80 to 90 % reduction for now. In summary, to meet the goal, energy, transportation, urban, and 
rural production and lifestyle systems require transformations and deep structural changes in every aspect.
Fundamental to this process is the energy efficiency required to not demand more energy than necessary, and the electrification of energy consumption, since it is easier to generate 
and distribute zero-emissions electricity than to find solutions to capture or eliminate emissions in millions of small sources, such as internal combustion engines or boilers and stoves 
that currently use fossil fuels and generate emissions.
Establishing a goal by 2050 does not mean that action is postponed until that date. On the contrary, there is an urgency to implement the changes immediately. That is as it would 
be a mistake to think that we can act in the future as we have 32 years to reach the goal. To do so, it is essential to adopt an approach that takes into consideration the lifespan of 
technological investments. For example, in terms of energy generation and use, the lifespan varies between 15 years (for example, a car) to 40 years (for example, a thermoelectric 
generator). Other important infrastructure investments, such as bridges, roads, and dams, can have even longer lifespans. For this reason, and depending on the sector, the next 
investments or purchase or the one after that is made may be operating in 2050. The planning impact is straight: 2050 is much closer than it seems since it will occur in the lifespan of 
one or two assets, which is a short time period to carry out a fleet replacement by different technologies. Later, this point is revisited to illustrate the risk of "transition technologies" 
that may delay the adoption of zero-emissions technologies that have to and can be driven with immediacy.
17A new tool: Planning for decarbonization
Since the implementation of fundamental changes in multiple areas in such a short time is unusual, 
achieving this structural transformation presents a challenge for planners at government, municipality 
and company level. Each country must prepare for a new stage of its economic development and 
decarbonization, and in order to effectively do so, new planning tools have to be implemented.
 
Understanding the challenges requires the use of new tools12. Hence, the implementation of a 
decarbonization planning strategy is presented here. Given the depth of the climate challenge, the 
objectives would not be met through a traditional "incrementalist" approach that is focused on 
minimal and gradual improvements. It will also not be achieved with the exclusive use of traditional 
approaches that are based on optimization models (for example, to only foresee the "optimization" 
in the consumption of gasoline by state fleets being made to use less fuel would be insufficient). 
The methodology starts by recognizing that a political decision is required, one that involves a 
reconfiguration and structural changes of the economy. For instance, under this vision, the question 
related to the state fleets would be: how can they be transformed so that the state fleet stops 
consuming fossil fuels? 
 
The planning is composed of two stages: What technological and market changes must occur? 
And what institutional, fiscal, regulatory and social changes must be achieved to enhance these 
technological changes?
 
Planning for decarbonization sets the tone to answer both questions. Its main elements are:
•  To establish goals between the present and 2050 in all sectors that are, in aggregate, consistent 
with net zero emissions by 2050..
•  To generate narratives of sectoral change, to be able to communicate the transformation in a 
common language to all actors.
•  To draw a transformation pathway to move from the current state to the desired one in 
2050, with detailed technological pathways and market conditions in every sector. In the 
case of Costa Rica, especially for the energy sector, optimization models have been used, 
which have allowed a definition of the most cost-effective routes that are coherent with the 
transformational vision and are able to avoid lock-in processes.
•  To identify short- and medium-term actions to facilitate compliance with the pathways, 
_______________________________
12  See for example “2050 Pathways, a Handbook” de Jim Williams (SDSN) y Henri Waisman (IDDRI) in
 https://www.2050pathways.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/09/2050Pathways-Handbook-1.pdf
1188emphasizing the institutional, regulatory and fiscal changes  Planning for decarbonization provides actions distributed into 
that will be required so that the technological transformation  three stages of change
pathway can be fulfilled in expected times.
•  To establish just transition measures, thereby allowing people,  This Decarbonization Plan is structured in three major stages.
communities  and  companies  that  have  to  reorient  their 
activities and make adjustments to have the necessary support  The first stage of foundations (2018 - 2022) covers the Presidential 
to do so without losing sight of the diverse, often positive,  period  of  the  Alvarado  Administration  and  contains  urgent  and 
impacts that it will have on the consumers and other sectors  foundational actions, necessary not only for their immediate impacts, 
of the society. but also for generating conditions for a substantive transformation. 
  Simultaneously,  a  blind  spot  in  current  debates  is  taken  into 
Achieving decarbonization of Costa Rica requires a large number of  consideration: the importance of avoiding decisions that seem to 
specific actions, aligned with the vision of a coherent change sustained  be beneficial in the short-term, but when taking into account their 
over a period of three decades. A strategic and concise plan such as  impacts in the medium- and long-term, hinder or delay progress 
this one presents initial actions and indicates the route that should be  towards the decarbonization goal. The actions of this period have 
followed to continue the process. That is, the planning elements that  been developed in an Action Plan and are presented in the annex.
must be considered are provided in this initial roadmap.  
The second stage of inflection (2023-2030) covers the remaining 
 
eight years of the 2020s, which is when the pathway change towards 
It is important to consider that this planning exercise is conceived 
transformation  must  take  place. Visions  of  change  will  focus  on 
as a flexible tool, since not all the necessary solutions required to 
elements  which  will  be  agreed  upon  and  detailed  with  various 
achieve decarbonization in every sector are available yet, nor have 
ministries and stakeholders. The interdependencies between different 
they all been identified. It is a given that in the coming decades, there 
sectors will be carefully examined. With this knowledge and support, 
will be many cases of disruptive technological, economic and social 
decisive interventions that will redirect the markets towards zero-
changes that will force an update of the plan. Based on this vision, 
emissions will be completed. The need for a set of actions and multiple 
section 5 offers more concrete actions in the short-term, which are 
adjustments for this evolution is thus recognized. In addition, deep 
expanded upon in the Action Plan 2018-2022 located in the Annex, 
institutional changes will be implemented to reduce the barriers for 
and more generic actions are offered towards the long-term, with 
change.
the consideration that the Plan will remain relevant through periodic 
 
updates. It is important to re-emphasize  that this document will be 
For  the  third  stage  of  normalization  of  the  change  or  mass 
part of a broader development planning process that MIDEPLAN will 
deployment (2031 - 2050), the current knowledge available will 
lead with the Costa Rica 2050 Strategic Plan and will also feed into the 
inevitably be more limited as we do not know what the world will be 
process of updating the NDC to be presented in 2020.
like in the future. However, we do know that during this period, action 
implementation will be easier to appropriately execute as old assets, 
for example, equipment and facilities that have ended their usable 
lifespan, and will be replaced with new ones that will already be 
equipped with decarbonized technologies (the success of this stage 
will not be possible without having achieved profound changes in the 
19previous stages for this condition to be true). A constant drive must  there will be a greater market of zero-emissions technologies which 
be maintained to achieve deep emissions reductions. For this stage,  will contribute to the transformation and will provide opportunities 
other countries would also be seeking to decarbonize their economies,  to the leading countries.
Figure 5: The three temporal stages of the Decarbonization Plan
Short-term Actions that should be avoided because they will  The need to assess whether a measure is aligned with the Paris 
delay a long term transformation must be identified Agreement or not, in which case it should be avoided, applies to new 
actions, but it also crucially applies to plans conceptualized before the 
Creating  an  economy  compatible  with  the  Paris  Agreement  has  agreement was signed. As explained above, this creates a watershed 
consequences for the measures that must be adopted, along with  moment: before its entry into force, a measure that reduced emissions 
those that should not be adopted. Specifically, there are investments  was considered an improvement. However, with its entry into force, 
that will reduce some emissions in the short-term, but not enough to  the question is no longer a case of whether a technology improves, 
reach net-zero and fulfill the long-term goal. These are investments  but  whether  the  sum  of  the  improvements  is  aligned  with  the 
with long lifespans, and should therefore be avoided, since they will  trajectory of the decarbonization required to comply with the goals 
represent emissions that will impede timely change, postponing it  of the Agreement. It is a decisive change of focus that has direct 
beyond 2050. This problem is commonly referred to as "lock-in". consequences for investment decisions.
   
2200Classic  cases  of  "lock-in"  (or  committed  emissions)  occur  when  would  delay  the  transition.  Fortunately,  many  zero  or  near-zero 
introducing  technological  changes  into  the  energy  sectors  that  emission technologies, such as renewable generation and electric 
allows for partial emission reductions. Examples can be the change of  transport are now available in the market. If the argument for partial 
coal, bunker, fuel oil, or diesel, to natural gas in electrical or industrial  solutions is attempted through short-term financial arguments, it will 
generation. In these cases, it was previously recognized that reducing  be necessary to make regulatory and fiscal corrections to redirect 
emissions with respect to an inertial scenario was already progress.  the investments so that they will be consistent with the vision of 
However, the need to reach net zero emissions , the question is no  development without emissions.
longer whether there is an improvement, but rather whether this   
progress generates a sufficient level of mitigation required to be  It is important to point out that we are currently working on the 
able to operate the technology long enough in a carbon-constrained  consolidation of dynamic models that involve the participation of 
world to amortize the investment made over. both academic and institutional actors within MIDEPLAN, the Central 
  Bank, and MINAE. These models, and the use of methodologies such 
A concrete example would be transportation. The global economy  as "robust decision-making", will allow the country to have deeper 
has a few years - 20 or 30 years maximum - to make the transition to  debates based on better information, science, and data in order to 
zero-emissions transport to meet the goals. This temporary window  more clearly identify lock-in processes in order to avoid them.
creates a new challenge for investments in relatively low-carbon 
(as opposed to zero-emission) assets, for example, investments in 
natural gas - which have lifespans of 20 to 30 years or more, too long  The use of Models in the current process
to qualify as a temporary or "bridge" technology, which would be 
the only reason to justify their acquisition as part of decarbonization  An energy model with a linear system optimization called TIMES-CR 
effort They are not advisable investments within a transformational  was used as a complementary tool to the planning process based 
decarbonization pathway. on the construction of the vision and goal of a decarbonized Costa 
  Rica and the definition of policy packages applying a backcasting 
In addition  to this limitation, a majority of countries have scarce  approach.
capital to invest and this requires prioritizing the financing of cleaner   
and more transformative solutions instead of partial solutions that  The TIMES-CR model is an energy model, initially developed in the 
United States, which has been calibrated to characterize the Costa 
Rican energy sector. It has a structure of energy supply dimensioned 
at spatial and temporal levels, which has different primary sources of 
energy (for example, wind, solar, hydraulic, gasoline, diesel, etc.) and 
processes or technologies to transform them (for example , electric 
vehicles, buses, industrial energy processes, etc.), and thus satisfies 
the  final  energy  requirement  (for  example,  passenger  mobility). 
Figure 6 shows a simplification of this energy system thus allowing an 
understanding of the relationships between the types of fuels which 
are inherent to the model.
21Figure 6: TIMES-CR Model structure13 
_______________________________
13    Reference work: Costa Rica – Assessing Mitigation Pathways to Support NDC 
Implementation (2017).
22TIMES-CR is a "bottom-up" linear optimization model to support long- and costs, among others. These demands are then met with the least-
term planning exercises, which considers technological transformation  cost option which meets the decarbonization goal and the policies 
as a starting point. This optimization allows the choosing the lowest  proposed by the government. The main objective of using this model 
cost of investments that are aligned with a defined decarbonization  would be to establish a reference line that enables diverse efforts to 
goal. be aligned in the right direction. Additional analyses pertaining to the 
  management of uncertainty and to the relationships between the 
The analysis is based on energy demands in the model which are  energy model and the rest of the sectors will be necessary in order to 
linked to the projections of population and economic growth by 2050,  further refine the decarbonization pathways. 14.
as well as elasticities, trends and assumptions regarding efficiencies 
Figura 7:    TIMES-CR model process.
_______________________________
14    The Power and Energy Research Laboratory (EPERLab) of the School of Electrical 
Engineering of the University of Costa Rica with the support of the IDB is currently 
working to improve current models with various methodologies under the Deep 
Decarbonization Pathways program. The energy model in TIMES CR is migrating 
to a new Osmosys tool, and is complementing new analysis processes under the 
Robust Decision Making (RDM) methodology. For the Strategic Plan, it is expected to 
collaborate with MIDEPLAN with a more integral model that incorporates elements 
and links between water, soil, climate, energy - CLEW.
23For this reason, this work is not a forecast of the future, but an analysis  performed, and the result of this operation is transferred to the VEDA-
of the requirements of the energy system needed to achieve emission  BE module for the results visualization and the generation of output 
goals  which,  when  combined  with  estimates  for  decarbonized  files. The process is iterative, and each output is analyzed by modelers 
emissions from the other sectors , would in aggregate be aligned  in order to validate the coherence between the input data and the 
with what is necessary to keep the maximum increase in the average  results.
temperature of the planet to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. For the   
analysis, the diagram shown in Figure 7 was used. This starts from  The inputs data in the TIMES model, as well as their respective sources, 
a set of input parameters, such as energy demand and technology  are those shown in Table 1. Many data used to calibrate the model have 
restrictions that adjust to the national reality. Subsequently, the VEDA- a high uncertainty in the long-term range. For this reason, the results 
FE module generates a data structure to evaluate each scenario in  of this model are a guide that must be refined with robust analysis 
TIMES, and this contains all the structures and relationships between  techniques that contemplate multiple possible scenarios. Modeling 
technologies or processes and fuels. Through a code in the General  aims  to  guide  investment  decisions  and  identify  the  technology 
Algebraic  Modeling  System  (GAMS),  the  optimization  process  is  options which are most convenient and aligned with the set goals.
Table 3: Input data and analysis sources
 Input data Sources
Energy balance 2015  Energy Subsector Planning Secretariat (SEPSE).
Estimated economic growth Central Bank of Costa Rica (BCCR).
Energy elasticities International Consultants (DecisionWare Group)
Technology costs U.S. Environmental Protection Agency EPA-US9RT database
Technological efficiencies U.S. Environmental Protection Agency EPA-US9RT database.
Fuel costs U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA).
Non-energy sector National Meteorological Institute's National (IMN) GHG Inventory (2012)
Energy balance 2015
Data provided by the DCC.
2244Results of the Model 
A sectoral contribution target by 2050 was established to determine 
The results of the model, together with the inputs collected during  the  contributions  by  sector,    and  this  took  into  account  the 
the consultation processes, allowed a refinement of the public policy  proportions presented in the base case and under the premise of a 
packages, both at the level of their vision-goals, and at the level of the  fixed absorption value. In 2012, the maximum emissions of carbon 
specific actions and technologies that are to be incorporated. dioxide equivalent (CO2eq) of every sector, which are categorized in 
To evaluate the policy packages, three scenarios were generated: the Greenhouse Gases (GHG) Inventory 2012, have a proportion of 
•  BAU or Business as Usual Scenario: This projects the behavior of  64.13% for energy, 8.72% for industrial processes, 10.58% for AFOLU, 
the emissions without considering public policy interventions. and 16.57% for waste – this is taking into consideration the forestry 
•  Scenario 2°C: It is a scenario with public policy interventions  sector absorption reported in the GHG inventory. These proportions 
that are compatible with the NDC's goals of Costa Rica. remain constant, with a varying absorption of 2 Gg of CO2eq to 3.5 
•  Scenario 1.5°C: It is a scenario with public policy interventions  Gg of CO2eq in 2030; which will stay steady after 2030. There is a high 
that are compatible with net-zero emissions in 2050 and it is  difficulty in defining the maximum emission capacity for each sector, 
the goal of the National Decarbonization Plan. and this is mainly due to the lack of tools to model the non-energy 
•  Figure 8 shows the different trajectories of emissions from the  sector. For example, there is a high uncertainty in the carbon dioxide 
base scenario and those corresponding to 1.5°C and 2°C.  absorption value of the forestry sector in the future.
 
Table 4 shows the main results of the simulations, which contemplate 
the  energy  system  and  the  other  sectors  according  to  the  GEI 
Inventory.
Table 4: Emissions estimates for the generated scenarios
 Sector Reference GHG  Base case  Scenario  Scenario 
2012 Inventory  scenario  2 °C 1.5 °C
(IMN) (2050 (2050 (2050)
Energy 7,21 9,48 4,54 2,64
Industrial 
processes 0,98 1,41 0,68 0,39
Agriculture 3,24 5,90 2,82 1,64
Waste 1,86 2,97 1,42 0,83
Net Forest area -2,05 -3,50 -3,50 -5,50
Total 11,24 16,26 5,96 0,00
25The evaluations show that the base scenario has a 45% growth in emissions in relation to the last 
GHG inventory, and that the scenarios of 2°C and 1.5 C are possible with a definition of clear goals 
associated with the electrification of transport. There is a more cost-effective transition period 
provided by technologies where Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG) and biofuels seem to play a role in 
retrofitting the current fleets and have long lifespans, particularly for the cargo transport segment, 
where zero emissions technological options are still not commercially available.
Figure 9: Sectorial emissions for the 2°C scenario
Figure 10: Sectoral emissions for the 1.5°C scenario
2266Exchange and consultation with diverse actors 
The decarbonization planning methodology included a process with stakeholders from sectoral, 
autonomous, and subnational level institutions, as well as from the private sector, civil society, and 
Academy.
 
First, the process included a series of bilateral meetings with key stakeholders and authorities at the 
level of Ministers and Executive Presidents of central institutions. This exercise made it possible to 
understand visions, priorities, and establish a frame of reference for the long-term planning process. 
In this stage, high-level meetings with the President, Minister of Environment and Energy and the 
various teams they appointed took place. Meetings were also held with the Office of the First Lady, 
the Minister of MIDEPLAN, representatives of the economic sector, Vice-Minister of Public Works and 
Transport, Vice-Minister of Agriculture, Vice-Minister of Energy, Directors of MINAE, representatives 
of the Secretariat of Environment Sector Planning, Executive President of RECOPE, and Executive 
President of Costa Rican Institute of Electricity (ICE), as well as with representatives of the Chamber of 
Industries and sectoral experts, among others.
 
In a second stage, two series of workshops were held, the first during the week of the 22nd to 26th of 
October and the second during the week of the 13th to 16th of November 2018.
Table 5: Participants in both series of exchange and consultation workshops
First consultation (Total 154)  Second consultation (Total 
Date
Axis
Number of 
participants
During the first series of workshops, the Decarbonization Plan,  the 10 axes and cross-cutting strategies 
were presented to participants, allowing for the collection of inputs for the design of the more detailed 
activities that were incorporated into the Action Plan. In the second series of workshops, the actions 
proposal was strengthened; and an exercise of prioritization and identification of links between the 
  First consultation (Total 154)  Second consultation (Total 192)
cross-cutting strategies were carried out.
Date  Oct. 22nd  Oct. 23rd  Oct. 24th   Oct. 25th  Oct. 26th  Nov. 13th  
Nov. 14th  Nov. 15th   Nov. 16th 
Axis (LoA)  LoA1-3 LoA 4-5 LoA6   LoA7  LoA8-10  LoA1-3 LoA4-6 LoA   LoA 8-10
27
Number of participants 32  24  23  35  40  38  51  40  63 Both series of workshops evidenced the great interest that exists on  The  initial  exchange  process  evidenced  the  need  to  continue 
the part of the stakeholders in seeking co-creation processes. building during the following stages, whether it is associated with 
  the initial implementation, the process of updating and/or the future 
The  workshop  sessions  were  complemented  with  visits  to  and  adjustment that will be carried out. Workshop supporting materials 
presentation of the Plan in various sessions of boards of directors,  and feedback can be accessed through the DCC platform at
among them the Public Transport Council, RECOPE, and ICE.  https://cambioclimatico.go.cr
 
2288Section 5: 
Short-, medium- and long-term goals and actions for the decarbonization of the Costa 
Rican economy 
Through this plan, the Government of Costa Rica defines its goal to be a  greenhouse gases inventory. To identify the actions of each axis, the 
net-zero emissions economy by 2050. This goal is consistent with science  methodology "Decarbonization Planning" described in section 4 was 
and with the recent IPCC Special Report on 1.5°C. The policy packages  carried out. The actions of change within each line are presented in three 
presented, and the planning processes developed, are considered as  temporal stages: foundations (2018 - 2022), inflection (2023 - 2013) and 
the starting actions, and will have to be complemented and updated in  massive deployment (2031 - 2050) - already described earlier - to achieve 
subsequent iterations under the principle of progresion, always consistent  the vision of transformations that guide each sector. This is complemented 
with the goal.  with the actions that must be avoided in each axis so that the country does 
not enter into a technological trajectory from which it will be difficult to 
It is recognized that decarbonizing all sectors of the economy will take 
exit once an investment is made. This scenario has been elaborated upon 
time and that specific actions, aligned to a vision of consistent and 
in the previous section and it is known as "emissions lock-in".
coherent change must be executed, and this has to be in accordance 
with the maturity of zero-emissions technologies over a period of three 
decades. To initiate this process, this strategic plan is deliberately concise  Cuadro 6: Linkages between the 10 decarbonization axiss and the 
in order to identify ten axes of decarbonization in key sectors, with the  emissions sources according to the National Inventory
initial actions being a part of the pathway that will be negotiated and 
deepened over time. In other words, there is no intention to list all the 
necessary measures, but to identify the essential ones, which will be 
presented in an abbreviated form. They will be further elaborated on in 
other policy instruments, such as the Costa Rica 2050 Strategic Plan, and in 
future iterations of Costa Rica’s Nationally Determined Contributions and 
of the Decarbonization Plan itself. 
There are uncertainties and factors that will be beyond the control of 
the country, and these could be strongly associated with disruptive 
technological processes, mobility, production and electrical distribution 
schemes, among others. For these reasons, the process and the plan are 
conceived as an adaptive approach that should be updated as these new 
conditions arise. This is why more concrete actions are presented in the 
short-term and gradually become more generic when discussing the 
long-term.
This section builds on the 10 axes of decarbonization derived from the 
29Figure 11: Trend of emissions reduction by sector according to the  Figure 12: Trend of reduction of emissions of the energy sector 
interventions of the Decarbonization Plan. according to the interventions of the Decarbonization Plan
 Elaborated based on TIMES model data (EPER-Lab UCR, 2019) Elaborated based on TIMES model data (EPER-Lab UCR, 2019)
Policy packages aimed at coordinating actions and obtaining high-impact results
Decarbonization requires taking coordinated action to advance each result from several fronts. Therefore, this document refers to "policy packages", which are 
packages defined as a set of measures that does not only plan a change, but also empower, finance and support institutional capacities and eliminate barriers 
that may hinder their adoption. For this plan, the categories of policy proposals forming the packages are:
•  Planning action and/or preparation of a strategy. Requires analysis, design, and political agreement.
•  Institutional or regulatory change action. Requires capacity building and/or approval, as well as an understanding of institutional barriers that 
need to be overcome. 
•  Implementation of project or execution of initiative. Requires funds and execution capacity.
•  Obtaining/provision of financing. Requires the preparation of a clear economic proposal and access to markets and financial mechanisms.
•  Citizen acceptance and just transition. Requires the understanding of the barriers to change and the need for timely action in their undertakings.
•  Prevention of "lock-in". Strict decarbonization criteria need to be applied to actions that are incompatible with this plan because they move the 
country away from the goal.
30Table 7: The 10 axes in the decarbonization and cross cutting strategy
 10 axes of the decarbonization Cross-cutting strategies
1. Development of a mobility system based on safe, efficient and 
renewable public transport, and on active mobility schemes.
2.  Transformation  of  the  light-duty  vehicles  fleet  to  have  zero-
emissions, sustained by renewable energy, not of fossil origin.
A.  Comprehensive  reform  for  the  new 
3. Promotion of a cargo transport that adopts modalities, technologies 
institutionality of the Bicentennial. 
and sources of energy zero-emissions or the lowest emission possible.
B. Green Tax Reform.
4. Consolidation of the national electric system with capacity, flexibility, 
intelligence, and resilience necessary to supply and manage renewable 
C. Funding strategy and investments attraction 
energy at competitive cost.
for transformation.
5. Development of buildings for different uses (commercial, residential, 
institutional) under the standards of high efficiency and low emission  D.  Digitalization  and  Knowledge-based 
processes. Economy Strategy.
6. Transformation  of  the  industrial  sector  through  processes  and 
E. Labor strategies of "just transition".
technologies that use energy from renewable sources or other efficient 
and sustainable methods that have low or zero-emissions.
F. Inclusion, human rights and promotion of 
7. Development of an integrated waste management system based  gender equality.
on the separation, reuse, revaluation, and final disposal of maximum 
efficiency and low GHG emissions. G.  Transparency,  metrics  and  open  data 
strategy.
8. Promotion of highly efficient agro-food systems that generate low-
carbon local consumption and export goods.
H.  Education  and  Culture  Strategy:  the 
9. Consolidation of an eco-competitive livestock model based on  Bicentennial Costa Rica free of fossil fuels.
productive efficiency and reduction of GHG.
10. Consolidation of a model of management for rural, urban, and 
coastal territories that facilitates the protection of biodiversity, the 
increase and maintenance of forest cover, and ecosystem services 
based on nature-based solutions
In the next sections, the detailed activities of each line of action are presented. These are numbered to ease the 
reference to the timelines included in the Annex, in which the Action Plan 2018-2022 is presented.
31Decarbonization axis 1: 
Development of a mobility system based on safe, efficient and renewable public transport 
and active mobility schemes
Transformation vision:
Activities
1.1.1 To implement the sectorization of the public transport services, 
•  In 2035, 30% of the public transport fleet will be zero-emissions and 
in bus modality, in a manner aligned with the mobility needs of the 
the Passenger Electric Train will be in operation, running 100% on 
citizens and firstly focused on the GMA.
electricity..
•  To reorganize public transport routes; set trunk lines into operation 
•  In 2050, the public transport system (Buses, Taxis, Passenger Electric  in exclusive lanes.
Train)  will  operate  in  an  integrated  way,  replacing  the  private  •  To modernize the concession scheme for 2021, which will reward 
automobile as the first option of mobility for the population in the  efficient and decarbonized service provision.
GMA. •  To  develop  a  profitable  and  innovative  financial  model  that 
•  In 2050, 85% of the public transport fleet will be zero-emissions. promotes efficiency and transparency in the service operation.
 
•  In 2050, Compact Cities will have been consolidated in the main 
1.1.2 To establish and operate an efficient and accessible Electronic 
urban areas of the GMA and main secondary cities of the country, 
Payment system for bus and train services.
with an increase of 10% of non-motorized journeys
 
1.1.3 To adopt measures that promote intermodality.
•  To  design  and  implement  intermodal  stations  (train-bus-taxi-
Activities to foster change: bicycles).
2019– 2022 •  To design and adjust the schedules for the provision of public 
transport services in a way that promotes systems integration.
 
1.  To modernize public transport and to create an integrated 
1.1.4 To establish a governance model under the sustainable mobility 
and intermodal system
system approach.
•  To  strengthen  the  capacities  and  transparency  of  the  Public 
Period goals
Transport Council and the stewardship of the Ministry of Public 
•  8 main trunk lines in operation.
Works and Transport (MOPT).
•  At least one public transport mode operates with a system of 
•  To articulate joint approaches to land use planning and transport 
integrated electronic payment.
planning.
•  Electric Passenger Train tendered.
321.1.5 To progress in the construction of the Electric Train under the  on the GMA routes. 
most feasible model, connecting Cartago, San José, Heredia and  •  To design and approve the tariff scheme appropriate to the use 
Alajuela.  of new technology in public transport, in order to ensure the 
•  To carry out feasibility and environmental impact studies.  affordability of the rates. 
•  To design the construction plans.  •  To  design  financing  alternatives  and  incentives  for  proof  of 
•  To  prepare  international  bidding  documents  for  the  design,  concept at the level of transport companies. 
construction and operation phase.  •  To define a joint and integral line of action. 
•  To bid for the concession of the electric train construction.  •  To  establish  a  schedule  for  the  implementation  of  the  fleet 
•  To develop a financial and technical strategy for the construction  electrification. 
and commissioning of the Electric Train aligned with a vision of  •  To align concession contracts of 2021 with objectives and goals of 
intermodality and sustainable mobility.  the Decarbonization Plan and Law 9518: Incentives and Promotion 
  for Electric Transportation. 
1.1.6 To  implement  campaigns  that  promotes  the  use  of  public   
transport and intermodality.  1.2.2 To identify and evaluate the best options to electrify the taxi 
fleet.  
2. To promote the decarbonization of the public transport sector  •  To analyze the implications of the tariff scheme and identify 
through the electrification and adoption of zero-emissions  improvements to facilitate technology adoption in taxis. 
technologies •  To identify financing scheme to facilitate renewal of the taxi fleet. 
•  To design a pilot program for the electrification of taxis.
Period goals  
•  To implement electric buses pilot on at least 2 public transport  1.2.3 To explore the technical and financial feasibility of creating a 
routes.  public fund to improve the conditions of the transition to electric 
•  Bus  service  concession  contracts  include  specific  goals  and  public transport.
conditions associated with the use of electric or zero-emission   
buses.  1.2.4 To design a plan to promote hydrogen and other zero-emissions 
•  To design and officialize the Roadmap for the consolidation of the  technologies.
Hydrogen Cluster.  •  To  define  the  Roadmap  to  consolidate  a  Research  and 
Development (R&D) cluster in Hydrogen 
•  To implement the inter-institutional action plan to promote the 
Activities use of hydrogen in the transport sector.
1.2.1 To establish the electrification of public transport program,  •  To conduct pre-feasibility studies of the identified key projects, 
which will include the implementation of three electric buses pilots,  and define a business model
financing alternatives and incentives to test the process at the level  •  To design the pilot project of hydrogen public buses
of transportation companies, considering tariffs that facilitate the  •  To  publicize  the  lessons  in  terms  of  costs,  performance  and 
inclusion of the technology in the model of service provision.    infrastructure.
•  To implement three electric buses pilots - launched in June 2018   
331.2.5 To analyze the options for new undertakings and business models to promote shared 
mobility schemes in the country. 
 
1.2.6 To launch communication campaigns that promotes public transport and zero-emissions. 
 
•  To communicate about the benefits of zero-emissions public transport in the long-term and 
its relationship with the goal of decarbonization. 
•  To raise awareness about pioneer bus companies with zero-emissions technologies. 
•  To raise awareness about real-time information of an air quality monitoring system to warn 
the population about high contamination situations.
3. To promote low-emission urban development schemes through the integration of the 
"transportation-oriented development" approach into land planning and management 
instruments.
Period goals
•  The implementation of transport-oriented development and low emissions practices in at 
least 3 municipalities. 
•  The participation of 16 municipalities in the 2nd “cantonal” category of the National Carbon 
Neutral Program (PPCN).
Activities
1.3.1 To review and adjust the Regulatory Plans and other territorial management tools in order 
to promote low-emissions development oriented to transport. 
•  To adjust the regulatory plans and urban development regulations to ensure that their 
formulation promotes a low-emission and transport-oriented development. 
•  To identify the necessary adjustments in the approved regulatory plans of the GMA to comply 
with the above statement. 
•  To  articulate  the  urban,  residential  and  commercial  development  policies  with  the 
transportation plans and land use planning.
1.3.2 To promote dense and compact city models. 
•  To promote cantons densification and compactness around the electric train.
•  To design programs and incentives to promote the model of compact cities.
 
341.3.3 To promote sustainable mobility in cities, with special emphasis 
on the promotion of active modes. 2023 – 2030 
•  To design and implement walkable city plans in the major urban 
centers of the country, including intermediate cities.
1. To strengthen the modernization of public transport:
•  To design and implement integrated plans to promote the use of 
•  To consolidate the modernization process in the GMA.
bicycles, which consider cyclo-inclusive infrastructure.
•  To design and implement preliminary plans for the modernization, 
•  To encourage innovation in the design and implementation of 
optimization and integration of public transport in interurban 
measures that promote sustainability in cities, in both the public 
paths and others in intermediate cities outside the GMA.
and private sector, and in civil society.
•  To  bid  for  the  operation  and  to  achieve  the  complete 
 
implementation of the Electric Train project between Cartago, 
1.3.4 To implement demand management measures.
San José, Heredia and Alajuela.
•  To expand the plate-based vehicular restriction to other urban 
 
centers such as Cartago, Heredia, and Alajuela.
2. To implement a transformative plan to expand zero-emissions 
•  To promote the development of parking policies on public roads 
urban public transport 
to limit parking areas on them.
•  To integrate goals under different scenarios - according to the 
 
maturity of the technologies (according to the global deployment 
1.3.5 To actively involve municipalities in the transition to low-
of electric buses, other zero emission technologies and dynamic 
emission development.
prices).
•  To implement infrastructure construction plans for active mobility 
•  To generate lessons learned based on experiences during the 
(sidewalks, bike lanes) in priority municipalities. 
period (2018-2022) about the Electric Train project and outsourced 
•  To increase the number of municipalities participating in the 
electric buses in 2021 and integrate them into the actions of this 
cantonal  category  of  the  "Cantonal  Carbon  Neutral  Country 
stage.
Program 2.0”, as well as the development of mitigation strategies 
•  To consolidate specific intervention areas to start densification.
and pilot projects at a cantonal level in key sectors such as 
•  To determine new pathways for transformation.
sustainable mobility, electric mobility and waste management.
•  To identify the requirements to guarantee zero emission energy 
supply (strong planning link with the line of action 4 about the 
electrical system).
•  To establish a process to evaluate innovative technological options, 
 To avoid “lock-in” 
including defining a transformative vision adapted to scale for 
To  avoid  the  promotion  and  adoption  of 
the future uses of hydrogen and fuel cells as a complement to the 
"transitional"  transportation  technologies  that 
other zero emission technologies.
create  barriers  for  the  decarbonization  of  the 
 
transport system in the medium- and long-term. 
3. To elaborate a transformative vision adapted to scale for a zero-
More modelling exercises have to be carried out to ensure informed 
emissions rural public transport.
decision-making.
•  To implement pilot projects of electric buses in rural areas.
35  establishing hard thresholds to discard/disqualify proposals that are 
4. To intensify actions in Sustainable Mobility. not consistent with the fulfillment of national goals.
•  To realize concrete urban interventions in cantons where the   
5. To innovate and to create integration and management capacities  2031 – 2050 
for an intermodal quality system, to explore the creation of an “Urban 
Transport Authority”.
1. To consolidate models of resilient cities oriented to zero-emissions: 
 
compact, oriented to public transport and non-motorized uses. 
6. To design and implement a funding strategy adapted to scale, 
 
taking advantage of the international leadership in decarbonization 
2. To expand projects adapted to scale, zero-emissions in public 
and  sustainable  transport  to  consolidate  the  fund  for  disruptive 
transport and shared mobility: fleets of buses, taxis, and train inside 
actions in zero-emissions transport.
and outside the GMA. 
 
3. To adapt to demographic challenges (to consider the implications 
To avoid “lock-in” 
of  having  an  aging  population  that  requires  specific  transport 
To include in bidding and purchase processes 
modalities). 
an analysis of the lifespan of the assets, both in 
 
fleet and auxiliaries, as well as in infrastructure 
4. To  implement  with  flexibility  new  business  models  and  other 
investments,  highlighting  their  contributions 
disruptive changes.
to  the  country's  emissions  pathway  (committed  emissions),  and 
36Decarbonization axis 2:
Transformation of the light-duty vehicles fleet to zero-emissions, boosted by renewable 
energy, not by fossil origin
Transformation vision::
Activities
•  By 2025, the growth of the motorcycle fleet will have stabilized and 
2.1.1 To publish a National Electric Transportation Plan and generate 
standards will be adopted to shift to a zero-emissions fleet. 
complementary regulations (guidelines, regulations and standards) to 
operationalize Law 9518 on incentives and promotion of the electric 
•  In 2035, 30% of the light vehicles fleet - private and institutional - will be 
transport. 
electric. In 2050, 95% of the fleet will be zero-emissions. 
•  To progress on regulations prohibiting the importation of light-
duty vehicles that use fossil fuels. 
•  By 2050, new models and shared mobility schemes will have been 
 
consolidated. 
2.1.2 To promote the implementation of the Sectoral Agreement on 
Emissions Reduction in the Transport Sector. 
•  By 2050, the country will have an extensive electric recharge network 
 
throughout the country and complementary infrastructure for zero 
2.1.3 To implement transition plans for zero-emissions transport in 
emission technologies (e.g., hydrogen stations).
institutional fleets. 
•  To adjust state procurement schemes. 
•  To implement pilot programs to change institutional fleets.
Activities to foster change:
•  To consolidate transformation program of commercial fleets in 
2019-2022 pilot sectors, e.g.: Tourism. 
 
2.1.4 To consolidate programs for the repair and maintenance of zero-
emissions vehicles. 
1. To accelerate the transition of the vehicle fleet towards zero-
•  To expand the INA capacity building programs in repair and 
emissions technology
maintenance of electric vehicles. 
 
Period goals
2.1.5 To consolidate the "Fast Charge Network" for electric transport. 
•  The National Electric Transportation Plan and complementary 
•  To set up fast recharge centers distributed throughout the country. 
regulations to operationalize Law 9518 are published. 
•  To analyze business models that encourage the private sector to 
•  Zero-emissions fleets acquired in at least 3 public institutions. 
accelerate the consolidation of fast recharging points.
•  69 fast recharge centers operating by 2022.
372. To improve the efficiency of the combustion fleet. 2.2.4 To design a roadmap for the efficient management of electric 
vehicle batteries at the end of their life cycle. 
Period Goals •  To analyze possible business models under the circular economy 
•  Incorporation of 5% to 10% of ethanol in both gasolines. approach.
•  Roadmap for production and use of biodiesel.  
•  Eco-Labeling for vehicle efficiency designed. 2.2.5 To consolidate the development of the national biofuels industry.
•  To implement the National Biofuels Strategy.
•  To implement demonstration projects with the MAG.
Activities •  To  analyze  potential  vertical  integration  of  RECOPE  in 
2.2.1 To launch zero-emissions transport promotion campaigns. agroindustrial chains, for example palm trees.
To develop educational campaigns to cut down myths associated  •  To mix ethanol of national origin with gasoline. 
with electric technology in vehicles. •  To mix biodiesel of national origin with diesel.
   
2.2.2 To  design  financing  mechanisms  for  the  energy  transition,  2.2.6 To design LPG Use Roadmap for specific niches coherent with 
including  banking  and  insurance  facilities  for  zero  emission  global decarbonization goals.
technologies. •  To design adequate standards and regulations to regulate LPG 
  conversion processes in the existing fleet.
2.2.3 To launch vehicle scrapping pilot program.  
•  To define a "roadmap" for the implementation of the scrappage  2.2.7 To update regulations to improve the quality of fuels.
model and business scheme. •  To adjust Central American regulations.
   
382.2.8 To improve and update the energy efficiency regulations for   
the transport sector by updating the standards for the import and  3. To give universal access to financing and insurance plans favorable 
circulation of internal combustion engine vehicles, improving fleet  to the purchase of zero-emissions vehicles, including for commercial 
standards.  uses (for example, for taxis).
•  To implement an eco-labeling in electric and combustion vehicles   
to make visible the vehicles efficiency. 4. To establish regulations so that the purchases of light vehicles for 
the Government are electric or zero-emissions.
 
To avoid “lock-in”  5. To implement programs to promote an attractive market for the 
To avoid the promotion and adoption of transport  early adoption of zero emission technologies to attract assemblers to 
technologies  called  "transitional"  that  create  the country.
barriers  for  the  decarbonization  of  transport   
system in the medium- and long-term. 6.  To  significantly  increase  sectorial  electrification  programs,  for 
example: tourism and commercial fleets.
 
2023 – 2030 7. To strengthen user education.
1. To promote price parity (linked to the green tax reform and carbon 
Avoid to “lock-in” 
pricing  strategies)  and  to  implement  policies  to  discourage  and 
To avoid investments in infrastructure that favor 
reduce the purchase and use of internal combustion vehicles to reach 
the  use  of  private  vehicles  rather  than  public 
the goal of zero sales of this technology.
transport as reducing the growth of the light 
 
vehicles fleet will be an important factor in achieving high rates of 
2. To strengthen the massive deployment of smart grid to extract 
technological change to zero-emissions vehicles.
value and improve the prices for storage and demand management 
(linked to the line of action 4).
2031– 2050
1. To consolidate the scaling process of technology adoption:  
•  To offer a wide range of electric vehicles.
•  To offer broad information for users.
•  To offer support systems (workshops, recharging stations).
•  To offer a national banking system lines of credit for the purchase 
of zero-emissions vehicles similar to a conventional product.
39Decarbonization axis 3:
Promotion of a freight transport that adopts modalities, technologies and energy sources 
until achieving zero or the lowest emissions possible
agreement with the Logistics and Cargo Plan.
Transformation vision: •  To  create  consolidation  centers  or  logistics  activity  zones 
(including  scanners  and  other  intelligent  merchandise 
management systems) in the peripheries of the GMA and other 
•  By 2022, Limon’s’ Electric Freight Train (TELCA) in operation.
emerging population centers.
•  To define peripheral routes and schedules that limit the access of 
•  By 2030, 20% of the fleet operates with LPG.
heavy trucks to urban centers.
•  To establish pilot projects of centers of consolidation and final 
•  In 2035 sustainable logistics models in major ports and urban areas 
distribution that combine technologies and various modes of 
of the country are consolidated.
transportation, creating possible “low-emission areas”.
•  To adequately divide loads so that the size of the cargo vehicles 
•  By 2050, cargo transportation will be highly efficient and will have 
that circulate in urban centers are proportional.
reduced emissions by 20% compared to 2018 emissions.
 
3.1.2 To generate open data to improve the planning of light and 
heavy cargo transport.
•  To generate the following open data: age of the fleet, types of 
Activities to foster change
vehicles, operating conditions, origins and destinations of the 
2019- 2022
cargo, type of cargo, origin of the trucks (domestic or foreign).
•  To evaluate the feasibility of designing a Monitoring, Reporting 
1.  To  consolidate  the  program  of  cargo  logistics  to  reduce  and Verification (MRV) scheme to measure the emissions from the 
emissions.  sector and from the transformation to a decarbonized one.
 
Period Goals 3.1.3 To integrate the intensive use of rail transportation for the 
•  At least 1 cargo logistics pilot project operates under low-emission  mobilization of merchandise in the major routes and demand in the 
parameters. distribution model and Pre-investment Study registered in MIDEPLAN 
•  Limon’s Electric Freight Train (TELCA) in operation. cargo commercialization.
•  To  develop  the  necessary  regulatory  instruments  for  the 
implementation of the TELCA, including the establishment of the 
3.1.1 To implement measures that improve the distribution of cargo in  rates, prices or fares required for its implementation.
402. To promote technological efficiency in heavy and light cargo  To avoid “lock-in”  
transport sector To limit the options that deepen dependence on 
fossil fuels or generate new dependencies.
Period goals To generate improvements in the regulation and 
•  Plan to improve efficiency and reduce emissions in the freight  gradual standards that are consistent with the 
transport sector. deep decarbonization process and which consider the availability of 
•  1 pilot project to improve the efficiency of the freight transport  competitive technological options and the lifespan of assets.
sector (use of biofuels and LPG).
Activities 2023 – 2030
3.2.1 To design a plan for the technological efficiency improvement 
 
of the cargo transport sector, which will consider aspects such as 
1. To agree on a technical standard of efficiency and reduction of 
technological improvement (LPG, for example), the use of filters, 
carbon emissions and pollutants that serve as a criteria for cargo 
biofuels and other efficiency improvements.
trucks with an agenda and intermediate goals.
•  To promote technologies such as LPG, use of filters, biofuels and 
•  To establish a trajectory with reduction goals for 2026 and 2030 
other efficiency improvements.
(for example, 20% reduction compared to 2018).
•  To implement a pilot project of efficiency improvement of the 
•  Not to invest in technological options that lead to compromised 
cargo transport.
emissions  incompatible  with  the  Paris  Agreement  has  to  be 
 
cautiously considered.
3.2.2 To implement a pilot project of efficiency improvement of the 
 
cargo transport.
2.  To  develop  an  advanced  logistics  approach  to  reduce  tons-
•  To  reinforce  road  emissions  controls,  of  the  compliance  of 
kilometers in order to meet the demand for cargo transport, both in 
standards and maintenance regulations for light and heavy cargo 
Costa Rica and in the Central American region.
vehicles.
 
•  To manage the strengthening of Central American and national 
3. To prepare financial and technological feasibility studies for the 
regulations linked to efficiency standards, emissions, safety for 
electrification of cargo transport through hydrogen vehicles in the 
light and heavy loads.
short- and medium-term.
 
 
3.2.3 To adjust Law 9518 so that fiscal incentives also apply for electric 
4. To implement pilot projects with alternative technologies.
light-duty vehicles.
To electrify and implement hydrogen technologies for the cargo 
 
transport.
3.2.4 To establish a Pilot Plan to involve companies in the cargo 
 
transport sector in the Carbon Neutrality Country Program 2.0.
5. To formalize a Central American dialogue to generate comparative 
analysis that allow to evaluate with data the competitive concerns 
that are expected in the Costa Rican sector if the lower environmental 
standards remain in the rest of Central America.
41Avoid to “lock-in”  2031 – 2050
To  avoid  investments  in  fuels  or  alternative 
energy  options  without  evaluating  first  their  1. To implement a funding strategy for transformation adapted to 
contributions to the emissions trajectories.  scale.
To  identify  other  risks  of  technological  or   
institutional "lock-in" as the sector evolves. 2.  To  implement  deployment  actions,  including  regulations, 
incentives, information processes and consolidated financing under 
the  assumption  that  zero-emissions  technologies  for  recharge 
transport are viable at this stage.
42Decarbonization axis 4:
Consolidation of the national electricity system with capacity, flexibility, intelligence and 
resilience, necessary to supply and manage renewable energy at a competitive cost
Transformation vision: Activities
4.1.1  To  promote  the  diversification  of  the  system  with  non-
•  By 2025, an integrated intersectorial planning of the electrification  conventional renewable sources.
process of the country’s different uses is implemented. •  To incorporate non-conventional renewable energies into the 
plans of generation expansion.
•  By 2030, the electricity matrix operates at 100% with renewable energy. •  To promote research on non-conventional renewable sources, as 
well as energy storage.
•  By 2050, electric power will be the primary source of energy for the  •  To promote studies for the decarbonization of thermal energy 
transport, residential, commercial and industrial sectors. support.
 
•  By 2050, the institutional processes will be digitized and will facilitate  4.1.2 To promote the electrification processes of key sectors.
efficiency and competitiveness. To link the electric sectoral planning with the sectoral planning of 
electric transport.
•  To promote the generation and exchange of information and 
Activities to foster change:
databases between the different actors of intersectoral planning.
2019- 2022
•  To estimate the demand projections between 2020 and 2050 
under scenarios that include: energy management and storage 
technologies,  electro-mobility,  energy  efficiency  and  other 
1. To promote the modernization of the electrical system to face 
elements that affect demand.
the challenges coming from decarbonization, digitalization, and 
 
decentralization in the electricity production.
4.1.3 To establish a national vision or strategy for the operation of 
smart grids.
Period goals
•  To  promote  processes  associated  with  digitization  and 
•  Maintain an electric matrix above 95% renewable that favors the 
establishment of smart networks.
transition towards the decarbonization of other sectors.
•  To purchase and install smart meters.
•  At  least  2  sectoral  plans  and/or  electrification  strategies  (eg, 
•  To realize related investments in smart grid components.
transportation, industry) prepared and published.
•  To monitor and analyses database information that supply the 
•  The installation and operation of 274,240 smart meters.
meters.
•  Plan to improve the  investment climate for the national electricity 
•  To develop the strategy of institutional process digitalization and 
system.
43impulse for the consolidation of smart networks. To avoid "Lock-in"
  Avoid short-term investment aimed at lowering 
4.1.4 To design a plan for the improvement of climate investment that  user rates without firstly evaluating their impact 
includes: on emissions during their lifespan (of direct and 
•  To establish governance in energy matters: includes strengthening  indirect investments).
of the rectory, access to information.
•  To analyze current electrical legislation.
•  To analyze distributed generation.
•  To analyze system risks. 2023 – 2030
•  To review tariff structure.
•  To re-adapt the financing models of the productive assets.
1. To implement strategies for the electrification and digitalization of 
•  To make visible the market of the auxiliary services of energy 
the different sectors of the economy, including scenarios and routes 
storage.
of flexible investment.
 
2. To strengthen the renewable diversification program with a vision 
2. To promote energy efficiency.
towards 2050, according to projected demand and costs.
 
Period goals
3.  To  increase  investments  to  expand  the  electro-mobility  zero-
•  An updated Energy Efficiency Law and complementary regulatory 
emissions in the transport of commuters, cargo and light vehicles.
framework.
 
•  20 macro public consumers have improved their energy efficiency.
4. To realize investments in transmission and distribution that allow 
the development of different models of generation and demand 
management. 
Activities
 
4.2.1 To promote energy efficiency:
5.  To  implement  financing  strategies  to  consolidate  the  energy 
•  To implement a more effective planning and coordination of 
transition process.
energy efficiency.
•  To facilitate access to more efficient equipment by institutions, 
consumers and entrepreneurs.
•  To update the list of efficient energy equipment that can be 
exonerated.
•  To promote a culture of energy efficiency among citizens.
•  To stimulate energy efficiency in macro-consumers.
•  To promote energy consumption efficiency in the public sector.
•  To adjust tariffs for the promotion of energy efficiency.
442031 – 2050
1.  To  implement  strategies  to  consolidate  the  energy  transition 
process.
 
2. To adjust investment plans that allow adaptations to technological 
disruptions.
 
To avoid " Lock-in"
3. To continue investing to meet electricity demand, maintaining a 
To  avoid  investing  in  the  short-term  to  lower 
diversified and low -emissions renewable energy matrix.
user  rates  without  evaluating  their  impact  on 
 
emissions  during  their  lifespan  (of  direct  and 
4. To maintain technological vigilance and innovation, which allows 
indirect investments).
the implementation of new low-emissions models.
45Decarbonization axis 5:
Development of buildings of different uses (commercial, residential, institutional) under high 
efficiency standards and low-emission processes
Transformation vision:  temperatures insulation, cooking systems, water heating, washing and/
or drying with electrical technologies, solar thermal, air conditioning 
•  By 2025, an increase of 10% in the use of wood, bamboo and other  or other more efficient and less polluting), efficient use of water, low 
local materials in buildings. carbon footprint materials (e.g., cement and green concrete, wood 
and bamboo, reuse of materials), among other sustainable practices 
•  By  2030,  100%  of  the  new  buildings  are  designed  and  built  that reduce the impact on emissions in the design, construction and 
adopting low-emission and resilience systems and technologies  operation of buildings and other infrastructures.
under bioclimatic parameters. •  To  generate  regulations  or  promote  the  existing  ones  for 
certifications, both for the public and private sectors.
•  By 2050, 50% of commercial, residential and institutional buildings  •  To  strengthen  the  guidelines  for  low-emission  sustainable 
operate under emission standards (high electrification or use of  construction  for public buildings and social housing through 
renewable energy in cooking processes and water heating). public biddings among other identified effective mechanisms.
•  To  evaluate  the  feasibility  of  establishing  regulations  for  the 
adoption  of  sustainable  low-emissions  construction  practices 
in different types of buildings, for example: affordable housing, 
Activities to foster change:
commercial and residential buildings, among other buildings and 
2019 - 2022
infrastructure categories.
 
1. To strengthen the regulations, standards and incentives for the  5.1.2  To  identify  incentive  schemes  to  promote  low-emission 
effective implementation of sustainable construction practices in  construction  (green  credits,  subsidies  review,  acknowledgments, 
buildings and other infrastructures. certifications, awards) to accelerate the adoption of these practices 
in private and public projects in accordance with the Sustainable 
Period goals Production and Consumption Policy, among other regulations.
•  20 new buildings applying environmental standards of a voluntary   
nature.. 5.1.3 To design a communication strategy that facilitates access to 
information  and  understanding  about  sustainable  low-emissions 
Activities construction.
5.1.1 To create and improve the standards that promote low- emission 
sustainable construction practices, such as energy efficiency (e.g.:  2. To improve operating practices of existing buildings and other 
46infrastructure  that  significantly  reduce  their  impact  on  GHG  2023 – 2030
emissions.
1. To strengthen the management capacity for the implementation of 
Period goals standards-technical regulations and labeling in urban planning areas, 
• At least 20 existing buildings implementing at least one action to  new buildings, existing buildings, equipment and devices.
reduce their GHG emissions in their operation.  
2.  To  establish  fiscal  and  consumer  financing  elements  (Energy 
Activities Transition  Fund)  to  give  access  to  efficient  technologies  –  just 
5.2.1 To promote the implementation of energy efficiency practices in  transition approach – to all segments of the population including the 
existing buildings. most vulnerable groups.
•  To promote the use of efficient, solar and refrigeration equipment   
and  natural  or  low  Global  Warming  Potential  (GWP)  air- 3. To apply scaling of projects and programs, aligned with the Public 
conditioning systems (in accordance with the Kigali Amendment)  Procurement System:
in existing buildings. •  To raise awareness among users.
  •  To educate with a special emphasis on the suppliers of public 
5.2.2 To promote the implementation of recognition programs such  institutions.
as the National Carbon Neutral Program, and/or the Ecological Blue  •  To  scale  the  implementation  of  recognition  programs  for 
Flag  Program  (PBAE)  in  its  categories:  Sustainable  Construction,  organizations,  companies  and  public  institutions  (Blue 
Sustainable Homes, Communities and Neutral Climate Community. Flag,  Carbon  Country  Program  Neutrality  2.0,  Institutional 
•  To support the implementation of the Technical Regulation of  Environmental Management Plans (PGAIs), and National Program 
Energy Efficiency and Labeling for the Regulation of Refrigerators,  for Environmental and Energy Labeling).
Refrigerators-Freezers and Freezers.  
  4. To promote the design and implementation of an MRV system for 
5.2.3 To promote the implementation of bioclimatic design, the reuse  sustainable construction in both private and public projects and the 
of materials, low carbon footprint materials such as cements and green  establishment of an entity that centralizes the data derived from it.
concrete, as well as local inputs (wood from national plantations and  •  To design urbanism.
/ or bamboo). •  To build new buildings.
•  To remodel existing buildings. 
•  To purchase and monitor equipment and devices.
Avoid to "Lock-in" •  To accelerate the adoption of standards in construction/buildings 
To avoid using carbonized technologies, e.g., LPG  and technologies of the sector, since an inefficient building or 
in cooking and water heating systems. obsolete technologies are a clear case of lock-in, similar to an air 
conditioning device lesser efficient than the more demanding 
standards.
472031 – 2050
1.The State Public Procurement System clearly notifies the market and operates under zero-
emissions parameters.
 
2. To strengthen the fiscal elements of just transition and consumer finance to give access to 
efficient technologies to all, required to reach mass acceptance of all sustainable standards at 
least from 2040.
48Decarbonization axis 6:
Transformation of the industrial sector through processes and technologies that use energy 
from renewable sources or others, sustainable and efficient, with low- and zero-emissions.
Transformation vision:  
6.1.2 To support the construction of Roadmaps for the reduction of 
• By 2030, the sector will have innovative productive models of "cradle to  emissions.
cradle" or circular economy in the main productive chains of the agro- •  To define specific GHG reduction targets by type of industry 
industry, services, construction, among others. (based on science) in the roadmaps, which can be translated 
into a commitment of the sector to reduce its GHG emissions 
• By 2050, the industrial sector will have changed its energy sources to  (Roadmaps with respective Voluntary Agreements).
decouple its activity growth from its emissions. •  To characterize the different types of industry processes according 
to their energy requirements and to promote the replacement 
of the use of fossil energy by renewable electricity, bioenergy 
(generated from biomass or waste) and implement improvements 
in energy efficiency.
Activities to foster change:
 
2019 – 2022
6.1.3 To promote energy efficiency in industrial processes:
(See linkage with line of action 4).
1.  To  promote  the  process  of  low-emissions  technological 
•  To promote good practices in energy management (for example, 
transformation of the industrial sector
ISO 50001).
•  To update the official list of exempted goods in accordance to the 
Period goals 
article 38 of the Regulation of the Rational Use of Energy, Law No. 
• At least 2 roadmaps for emissions reduction (1 per type of industry) 
7447 of November 3rd, 1994 and its amendments in accordance 
developed and published (e.g., Cement Sector).
with article 10 of the executive decree No. 41121 of April 5th, 
• At least 1 implemented pilot project to replace natural refrigerants.
2018, through the inclusion of new equipment and technologies.
• An updated official list of exempted goods by the Article 38 of Law 
•  To develop technical regulations that ensure the energy efficiency 
N ° 7447 on Regulation of the Rational Use of Energy.
of carbonized equipment.
 
Activities
6.1.4 To facilitate the substitution processes of refrigerants with low- 
6.1.1 To update and reactivate the industrial climate change strategy.
or zero-GWP in accordance with the Montreal Protocol and the Kigali 
•  To create a commission with the representation of the industrial 
amendment.
sector and key public institutions to promote the strategy and 
•  To align fiscal incentives (importation) to promote the use of 
Roadmaps.
49natural  refrigerants  and  the  equipment  that  uses  them  and  procurement  to  include  the  analysis  of  environmental  labels 
discourage the use of refrigerants with high GWP. recognized by the Costa Rican government.
•  To support pilot projects.
•  To develop regulations for the adequate disposal of refrigerants 
and associated equipment. Avoid to "lock-in"
To avoid the use of technologies that deepen the 
dependence on fossil fuels in the industry.
2. To promote the development and consumption of products 
and services under circular economy models.
Period goals 2023 – 2030
• 2 circular economy pilot projects in the industry implemented and 
documented.
1. To implement long-term technological pathways, with significant 
• At least 3 products have an environmental label or seal based on 
replacement programs when it is necessary to reduce activities in a 
the official scheme of the Government of Costa Rica.
sector that can be replaced by another.
 
Activities
2. To consolidate mechanisms for technical assistance, technology 
6.2.1 To promote the production of sustainable goods and services 
transfer,  and  financing  mechanisms  to  promote  investments  in 
that remove or reduce GHG emissions along the industry value chain.
innovations and best practices in the various industrial sub-sectors 
•  To support the design of circular economy models that promote 
(with special emphasis on boiler issues).
waste valorization, the generation of new raw materials and are 
 
inserted in the industrial and agroindustrial value chains (e.g., 
3. To implement new efficiency programs for industrial equipment in 
the use of waste from the agro-food industry as raw material or 
the country.
energy source in industrial processes).
 
•  To promote the use of the Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) and life 
4. To agree on a reporting and monitoring system with relevant 
cycle approach to determine the raw materials, inputs, processes 
authorities to supply the National Climate Change Metrics System 
or others that minimize the products GHG emissions.
(SINAMECC), among others.
 
6.2.2 To promote the consumption of products and services with 
smaller footprints and environmental impact.
Avoid to "lock-in": 
•  To standardize the definition of "green" products and services. 
By  converting  high  quality  energy  sources  as 
•  To implement the National Environmental and Energetic Labeling 
alternatives to fossil fuels, the analysis of energy 
Program for products with an LCA approach.
balance  has  to  be  realized  in  the  future  to 
•  To  develop  and  implement  a  Carbon  Neutrality  scheme  in 
ensure that the industrial demand is within the 
products under the Neutrality Carbon Country Program.
available options, such as, for example, agricultural waste. The above 
•  To  improve  the  technical  criteria  used  in  sustainable  public 
throughout his lifespan of industrial investments.
502031 – 2050
1. To implement and update a finance strategy adapted to scale for the transformation of the 
industrial sector.
 
2. To implement and update investment pathways to ensure the modernization, transformation, 
and decarbonization of the sector.
 
3. During this period, very limited investment in fossil technologies will be carried out. This 
investment will be realized along with a greater disablement and/or replacement of old fossil 
equipment with renewable options. As a result, year after year, the reduction of the use of fossil 
fuels and emissions from the industrial sector will be significant.
51Decarbonization axis 7
Development of an integrated system of maximum efficiency and low greenhouse gas 
emissions waste management based on the separation, reuse, revaluation and final disposal
Transformation vision: (NAMA). This strategy will consider aspects such as:
•  The  encouragement  of  the  treatment  of  organic  waste  at 
•  By  2025,  10  municipalities  implement  the  national  composting  household level.
strategy. •  The encouragement of the treatment of organic waste at industrial 
scale.
• By 2040, areas of high population density have a 100% coverage of  •  The promotion of the use of biodigestion as a treatment method 
sanitary sewer and wastewater treatment. for liquid and solid organic waste at large or multiple generators 
scale.
• By 2050, other priority areas have 100% coverage. •  To have a selective collection of non-recoverable and recoverable 
waste (organic and inorganic) at the municipal level through a 
• By 2050, 100% of the territory present solutions for the collection,  tariff scheme that allows to offer this public service in an efficient 
separation, reuse, and disposal of waste. way.
•  To analyze the municipal tariff charged for the collection of solid 
• By 2050, 20% of GMA's rivers have been restored.  waste and to identify improvements options to promote the 
improvement of the management.
 
7.1.2 To design technical and legal instruments to control the import, 
Activities to foster change:
manufacture and marketing of products and materials that generate 
2019- 2022
waste which are challenging to manage for the country, such as single-
use plastics, or waste challenging to recycle, or with no valuation 
1. To present policies that promote the integral management of 
method.
low-emission waste and circular economy
 
7.1.3 To review the technical and legal instruments that allow applying 
Period goals
the principle of extended responsibility of the producer from the 
• Launch of the National Composting Strategy
importation, manufacture and marketing of products and materials 
• Reach a volume of 3,800 tons of solid waste that are managed daily.
to strengthen its implementation.
• Designed NAMA strategy to reduce emissions in the waste sector.
7.1.4 To implement an environmental labeling system for the products 
Activities
and materials marketed in the country that allows consumers to 
7.1.1 To design a mitigation strategy for emissions in the waste sector 
52clearly identify if the product or material is recyclable or not; and in  Management of Water Resources (SINIGIRH) to collect data on the 
which category it should be recycled, using the color codes of the  entities that generate wastewater. 
National Strategy for Separation, Recovery and Recovery of Waste.   
See linkage with the line of action 6.  7.2.3  To  expand  the  coverage  of  sanitary  sewer  networks  and 
  treatment systems of ordinary residential wastewater in the country.
7.1.5 To create the enabling conditions to enhance the use of biogas 
generated in mechanized sanitary landfills for generating electricity 
or as a fuel for mobile and fixed sources.  3.  To  create  enabling  conditions  to  improve  the  integral 
  management of solid and liquid waste at both residential and 
7.1.6  To  promote  productive  linkages  through  public-private  business levels
partnerships to strengthen the recycling value chain from its source. 
Period goals
• At least 1 executed dissemination and awareness campaign 
Avoid to "lock-in":  about avoiding, reducing, separating and treating the waste. 
To avoid the implementation of waste treatment  • At least 3 capacity building processes for municipalities about 
systems  that  implies  dependence  on  their  integral waste management. 
generation instead of promoting the reduction of  • At least 1 circular economy model pilot project promoting 
their generation.  integral waste management implemented.
To avoid obsolete technologies that delay compliance with the goals 
of this plan.
Activities
2. To strengthen the effective management of wastewater. 7.3.1 To massively launch dissemination and awareness campaigns on 
avoiding, reducing, separating and treating waste.
Period goals  
The  development  of  sanitary  sewer  projects  in  priority  sectors:  7.3.2 To  strengthen  metrics  and  access  to  information  on  waste 
Palmares, Jacó, Golfito and Ciudad de Limón15. management in open formats.
•  To standardize methodologies for measuring and publishing data. 
Activities •  To publish data on waste management in an accessible manner.
7.2.1 To  strengthen  the  execution  capacity  and  dialogue  of  the   
governing entities in the control and monitoring of the reports of  7.3.3 To strengthen the capacities of the municipalities about waste 
water discharge without treatment or treatment plants and septic  management.
tanks malfunctioning through the existing regulatory instruments.  •  To design technical capacity building programs in low-emission 
  waste management.
7.2.2 To strengthen the IT platform of the National System of Integrated  •  To strengthen the monitoring commissions Municipal Waste Plan.
•  To generate spaces to improve the intermunicipal articulation in 
_______________________________
waste management (transfer centers).
15   Goal aligned with the National Development and Public Investment Plan (PNDIP)
53•  To strengthen the audit and report of the municipalities. •  To determine the governance and institutional strengthening 
•  To create a database of municipal actions to exchange best and  requirements  necessary  for  the  success  of  the  plans,  before 
mal-practices of waste management. financing and implementing them.
•  To  increase  the  involvement  of  the  municipalities  in  the 
improvements of waste management as a measure to reduce  3. To improve the availability of data in the sector by improving data 
emissions under the PPCN. collection and supplying various Information Systems. 
   
7.3.4 To generate spaces for a greater involvement of the private  4. To promote pilot investments: 
sector. •  To implement a Regional Recovery and Transfer Centers that 
•  To analyze the market of sellers and buyers of waste. facilitates the Integrated Waste Management (IWM) by type.  
•  To make visible the “winners” of the private sector in their work at  •  To implement technologies for the capture of methane in landfills. 
municipal level. •  To implement a pilot composting plants (e.g. compost using 
•  To determine the needs to promote the transformation of the  rotary drums and batteries, vermicompost). 
sector and the search for circular economy models. See linkage  •  To modernize the recollection systems, optimize the routes and 
with the line of action 6. improve the recollection vehicles. 
 
5. To evaluate and promote the use of economic instruments, linking 
sectors under a circular economy approach: Agriculture with Organic 
Agricultural Waste (OAWS); Residential and Commercial with non-
Avoid to "lock-in":  organic waste revaluation. 
To avoid the implementation of waste treatment   
systems  that  generate  dependence  on  their  6.  To  promote  education  and  awareness  campaigns  about  the 
generation, instead of promoting the reduction  generation and management of waste with an emphasis on the 
of their generation. established linkages with other objectives (for example, to reduce 
To avoid obsolete technologies that delay compliance with the goals  plastics to protect the oceans).
of this plan.
2023 – 2030
To avoid "lock-in":
1. To implement Phase I of NAMA Waste.
Not to increase waste management through landfill 
 
more than allowed by the national trajectories and 
2. To promote the implementation of Municipal Waste Management 
goals.
Plans  and  the  creation  of  Recycling  Programs  in  Municipalities 
through pilot projects.
542031 – 2050
1. To consolidate financing strategy to scale investments. 
 
2.  To  significantly  expand  the  use  of  more  effective  and  consistent  technologies  with 
environmental parameters and zero-emissions trajectory.
55Decarbonization axis 8:
Promotion of highly efficient agri-food systems that generate low-carbon export and local 
consumption goods  
Transformation vision: 1 To develop innovative processes in the value chain of priority 
products  that  facilitate  the  generation  of  decarbonized 
• By 2030, the value chains for coffee, livestock, sugarcane, rice, and  agricultural goods.
bananas use emission reduction technologies both at the farm and  Period goals
processing stage levels16. • At least 2 new NAMAs processes will be initiated.
• At least 2 Board agreements present instructions to align programs 
• By 2050, the most advanced methods and technologies are applied to  and instruments to support the producers with decarbonization 
achieve a sustainable, competitive, low-carbon, resilient agriculture  goals.
with the lowest levels of contamination.
Activities:
8.1.1 To promote the decarbonization and vertical integration of the 
Activities to foster change:
priority value chains.
2019- 2022
•  To develop and consolidate processes-programs of NAMAs17 in 
priority products. Coffee: to consolidate the escalation stage, 
_______________________________ Banano-Musaceas: to boost the initial process, Sugarcane-rice: to 
16    The prioritization of products is related to the agricultural sub sectors that generate 
initiate the processes.
the most emissions: livestock, coffee, sugar cane, bananas, rice. Other products could 
•  To  promote  the  identification,  transfer  and  adoption  of 
be incorporated if there is evidence of their impact on the generation of emissions 
within the agricultural sector..  technologies that reduce emissions and improve competitiveness 
at farm and processing levels.
17    In the Costa Rican context NAMA is understood as a programmatic intervention 
•  To promote actions that facilitate the commercialization of low-
that allows the identification of technologies for the reduction of emissions, it 
emission  products  (among  others,  to  promote  labeling  and 
allows generating training at the level of key structures MAG, ICAFE, Chambers, 
and producers to promote adoption of technologies, encourages the development  differentiation processes, promotional campaigns linked to the 
of MRV, and promotes vertical integration approaches to work equally with the  country brand).
commercialization processes. At the national level, the learning of the NAMA Café  •  To  promote  circular  economy  processes  that  promote  the 
and the NAMA Livestock will facilitate the start-up of the proposed new NAMAs. 
valuation and reuse of agricultural organic waste, and other waste 
generated along the value chain. See linkages with the axes 7 and 
8.
 8.1.2 To align the current agro-environmental policies and plans with 
56the decarbonization goals.  
•  To implement the Sectoral Agreement to Reduce Emissions in the  2. To implement Escalation Phases of NAMAs.
Agricultural Sector18. The agreement includes:  
- To develop financial mechanisms aimed at the implementation  3. To contribute to the transition from a low-emission agricultural 
of efficient low-carbon technologies. sector into bioeconomy-based, among other aspects, on the direct 
- To  develop  a  system  of  recognition  of  the  eco-benefits  use and sustainable transformation of biological resources, including 
generated by the farms in their sustainable and climatically  biomass waste generated in agricultural and agro-industrial processes, 
responsible production. under a circular economy focus.
- To consolidate the MRV system of the sector that supplies 
SINAMECC and GHG Inventory.
•  To establish board agreements in relevant institutions (for example:  2031 – 2050
Institute of Rural Development (INDER), Costa Rican Institute of 
Pacific Ports (INCOP), Banking System for Development, National 
1. To scale and transform for an agricultural system which is highly 
Directorate  of  Community  Development  (DINADECO),  among 
productive per production unit, low in carbon, resilient and that 
others) to align and allocate resources for the development of 
contributes to the Costa Rican bioeconomy.
decarbonization projects.
•  To  align  sub-sectoral  policies  and  strategies  with  the 
decarbonization  objectives  (e.g.,  Policy  /  Strategy  for  coffee 
production, Musaceas, Caña, etc).
Avoid to "Lock-in":
To  avoid  extensive  systems  and  crops  that 
compete with forest and conservation areas. 
2023 – 2030 
1.  To  consolidate  a  national  decarbonization  strategy  for  the 
agricultural sector, that includes the axis 8 (agriculture) and axis 9 
(livestock).
18   The Agreement was signed in 2018 by both Ministers and has a term of 5 years. This 
agreement reflects the sectoral contribution to the national goal defined in the NDC. 
The agreement can be found at https://cambioclimatico.go.cr/acuerdo-reduccion-
de-emisiones-sector-agropecuario/
57Decarbonization axis 9:
Consolidation of a livestock model based on productive efficiency and reduction of 
greenhouse gases
Transformation vision: industrial sector and Small and Medium Enterprise (SMEs) in the 
food sector.
• By 2025, a circular economy is promoted in livestock farms through 
the implementation of a biodigester program. Activities
9.1.1 To consolidate the Low Carbon Livestock Strategy (EGBC) as the 
• By 2030, 70% of the cattle herd and 60% of the areas dedicated to  policy to decarbonize the sector.
livestock implement low-carbon technologies. •  To  generate  a  guideline  that  consolidates  the  EGBC  as  the 
governing policy of the livestock sector.
•  By  2050,  livestock  activity  uses  the  most  advanced  technology   
according to the standards of sustainability, competitiveness, low- 9.1.2 To promote an eco-competitive livestock approach by scaling 
emissions and resilience to the impacts of climate change. up the NAMA Livestock, the implementation of efficient technologies, 
and technical support, among others.
•  To implement the first scaling of the NAMA Livestock. 
•  To promote activities along the value chain that promote the 
Activities to foster change:
implementation of efficient technology.
2019- 2022
•  To strengthen capacity building, extension work and technology 
transfer.
•  To increase the biodiversity of the farms.
1.  To  encourage  the  livestock  sector  to  contribute  to  the 
•  To  develop  a  second-generation  PES  Environmental  Services 
decarbonization using efficient practices and carbon capture in 
Payments model that recognizes the service coming from good 
farms, the protection of ecosystem services and the generation 
land management in farms.
of resilience.
•  To design and implement a mechanism to provide technical 
support to livestock farms, this mechanism must actively integrate 
Period goals
information technologies.
• 1 guideline for the Low-Carbon Livestock Strategy generated.
• 1773 livestock farms implementing NAMA technologies.
9.1.3 To develop and scale-up the meat and milk value chains with 
• 1 mechanism to provide technical support to the farms.
a circular economy approach for the generation of biomass from 
• 1 education campaign on organic agricultural waste for producers 
Organic Agricultural Waste (OWA). 
and technicians.
•  To introduce experiences in the use of OWAs in the livestock 
• 1 pilot project on the use of organic agricultural waste in the 
58sector (in particular, excreta and slurry in the production of biogas  • To evaluate the actions and goals established by the sector in 
and fertilizers).  the Sectoral Agreement for the Reduction of Emissions in the 
•  To implement pilot plans for the use of OWAs for the industrial  Agricultural Sector considering the goal of decarbonization of the 
sector (meat and dairy industry) and SMEs in the food sector. sector set in the NDC to 2030 and 2050 and in the context of the 
Paris Agreement. 
2. To design and improve the metric system associated with the  To reduce the contribution to 30-45 kg CO2eq per unit of the 
livestock production units Agricultural GDP (AGDP). 
To establish a level of ambition in agreement with the national 
Period goals goals and the Paris Agreement.
• A roadmap designed to consolidate national research on emission  To propose a broad scaling strategy is crucial because it is valid for 
factors.  5 years (2018-2023).
• 1700 farms implementing MRV. • To evaluate the "NAMA Cattle Livestock" model as a mitigation 
instrument  (for  example,  financing  model,  cost  of  climate 
Activities technologies and governance).
9.2.1 To enhance the calculation of the reduction generated with the   
measures and technologies of emission mitigation and to develop  2. Based on the evaluation, to review and update the Strategy for 
national emission factors.  Low-Carbon Livestock in Costa Rica (2015-2034).
•  To promote the realization of the necessary studies to develop   
national emission factors for the livestock sector.  3. To start a second scaling to initially benefit 10,000 additional farms, 
•  To consolidate the MRV system of the subsector and supply the  eventually covering around 33% of the livestock farms. This goal 
SINAMECC and the GHG Inventory, among other reports.   could be adjusted once the analysis of the level of ambition and 
•  To implement the MRV system in the first escalation of the NAMA  trajectory of the sector has been carried out in order to comply with 
Livestock. the decarbonization goals of the NDC and the Paris Agreement.
 
4. To examine the technological options of food management and 
Avoid to "Lock-in": methanogenesis reduction and the handling of excreta and waters to 
•  To  prevent  extensive  livestock  farming  from  not invest in options incompatible with decarbonization goals.
competing with areas for forest and conservation. 
•  To  avoid  feeding  systems  based  on  grains 
importation, which may increase the carbon footprint. 2031 – 2050
1. To implement a finance strategy at an adapted scale. 
2023 – 2030   
2. To scale up the transformation projects to consolidate an eco-
1. To consolidate a sectorial pathway aligned with the objectives of  competitive, densified, low carbon livestock, free of deforestation in 
the NDC and the Paris Agreement. the entire national territory.
59Decarbonization axis 10
The management of the rural, urban and coastal territory will be oriented towards 
conservation and sustainable use, growing forestry resources and ecosystem services based 
on nature-based solutions
Transformation vision:
Activities
• By 2030, the current forest cover is maintained, and new areas are  10.1.1. To promote the growth of forest cover and the restoration of 
restored to increase the cover to 60%, without competing with the  ecosystems.
agricultural sector. •  To turn green and regenerate urban space (example increase of 
recreational parks, interurban corridors, river corridors).
• By 2050, 4,500 hectares of green areas operate as recreational parks in  •  To  implement  tree  planting  productive  systems  (fences, 
the GMA, and a system of environmental-pedestrian networks that acts  agroforestry  systems,  marine-coastal  zones  in  strategies  and 
as biological corridors and pedestrian corridors is consolidated. restoration actions).
•  To stop deforestation.
• By 2050, the rural and coastal landscape allows the restoration and  •  To strengthen the conservation of ecosystems inside and outside 
protection  of  other  high  carbon  ecosystems  (Mangroves,  wetlands,  the protected areas.
peatlands, soils). •  To regenerate degraded lands through forest restoration and 
reforestation.
•  To accelerate actions to address forest fires.
•  To promote a landscape management with a restoration approach 
Activities to foster change:
in rural, coastal and urban areas.
2019- 2022
•  To design and launch new generation of Payments for Ecosystem 
Services PES to PES 2.0.
1. To implement the REDD+ Strategy to encourage the reduction 
•  To align the sale strategy of forest emission reduction consistent 
of emissions from deforestation, to avoid degradation, and to 
with the NDC and Decarbonization Plan.
preserve forests and ecosystems in both rural and urban areas.
 
10.1.2. To establish a sustainable management of forestry resources.
Period goals
•  To promote the consumption of national wood from plantations 
• REDD+ strategy completed and  financing initiated.
and agroforestry systems (See linkages with the line of action 5). 
• At least 3 kilometers of restored urban corridors.
•  To open a space of dialogue to discuss the issue of exploitation of 
• Payment for Ecosystem Service System PES 2.0.
secondary forests.
• SIMOCUTE 1.0 in operation and integrated with SINAMECC and 
•  To consolidate the Forest Monitoring system and ecosystems.
SINIA.
•  To establish a system of custody chain and traceability of wood.
60•  To improve data on emissions reduction accounting for m3 of  2023 – 2030 
wood consumed in the national territory.
1. To implement the REDD + Strategy Scaling Phase.
2. To promote the protection, restoration and management of 
 
other high carbon ecosystems. 
2. To consolidate the synergies between the strategies of the three 
conventions  (climate  change,  biodiversity,  soil  degradation).  To 
Period goals
implement projects focused on the three conventions.
• At least 2 pilot projects in management and protection of wetlands 
 
and mangroves implemented.
3.  To  implement  Urban  Landscape  Project  with  Environmental, 
• Analysis of other high carbon ecosystems realized.
Pedestrian and Cycling Networks.
 
Activity
4. To encourage the involvement of Municipalities in the landscape 
10.2.1 To strengthen carbon capture in other high carbon ecosystems
management processes of the biological and river corridors.
•  To consolidate the program of wetland and mangrove protection 
and management. 
•  To analyze strategies options associated with blue carbon.
2031 – 2050
•  To promote information gathering (mapping, status, etc.) of other 
high carbon ecosystems (peat bogs, etc).
5. To develop a financing strategy at scale. 
•  To promote soil management and restoration processes.
 
6. To deploy projects adapted to scale.
Avoid to " Lock-in":
To  avoid  investments  that  encourages  an 
expansive urban model and destruction of forest 
areas.
To  avoid  expansive  investments  (real  estate, 
agricultural activities) that lead to the destruction of forest areas, 
mangroves, wetlands.
61Section 6: 
Institutional requirements and involvement for transformation 
The implementation of actions fostering change, such as those described  actions within all sectors, is: who is responsible for the decarbonization 
in the previous section, not only requires visionary public policies (based on  of the economy? Is it the responsibility of the President or a particular 
data and with appropriate finance) but also a management capacity  that  minister? Should there be a high-level commission that would take 
lives up to the leadership the country needs to achieve decarbonization.  charge of the decisions and monitor progress?
Undoubtedly,  Costa  Rica  has  institutions  that  have  achieved  great   
milestones - in issues like education, health and trade. However, the  There is no universal model and each country should decide based on 
country must also modernize and modify its institutional and regulatory  its governance model. In the case of Costa Rica, the governance and 
structure to adjust it to the proposed change. monitoring of progress requires an institutional innovation that goes 
  beyond the environmental and/or climate sector. For example, given 
This aspect is consistent with the pressing reform aimed at modernizing  the high dependence on oil and the urgent need to transform the 
public management of the Costa Rican State. Without adequate public  existing transportation model, there is a crucial need to design a model 
management,  an  execution  of  the  decarbonization  agenda  will  be  that directly involves the economic sector. Simultaneously, to create 
challenging. Currently, many ministries and autonomous entities seem to  an architecture guided by the spirit of the aforementioned presidential 
lack the efficient mechanisms required to respond to society's expectations.  message will be necessary to facilitate the country’s transformation 
The best-known example is the shortcomings  that have accumulated  into one of the first decarbonized countries in the world. As such, the 
over the years in the transport sector,  which is characterized by being  team in charge of the agenda must insist on the debate of how to 
disjointed, unsustainable and inefficient. This has to invite reflection on  gestate the changes; to get out of the inertia of traditional debates 
the imperative changes necessary to advance the modernization of the  (reiterated in the paralysis and inability to generate a certain change 
country and the decarbonization of the economy. or reform, or to contravene the procedure of institutional use). Indeed, 
  the purpose of the instructional requirements for transformation, 
Given the previous statement, planning this decarbonization  requires  answers the question of what model of government management is 
a  need  to  identify  actions  that  foster  change  aimed  at  achieving   required in order for carbonization to be reversed?
decarbonization and complemented by (a) institutional requirements, (b)   
cross-cutting measures and (c) considerations on impact management.  In this context, an identification of the need to design institutional 
These are discussed below. governance options at the level of the required structural change 
is  relevant.  Some  changes  that  are  proposed  will  require  laws 
Institutional requirements for transformation adjustments that will take time. Hence, while they are developed, 
an initial or transitory proposal of articulation is required to further 
One  of  the  fundamental  institutional  questions,  given  the  promote the Decarbonization Agenda, and this would include the 
transformational  nature  of  decarbonization  and  the  inclusion  of  following structures: 
62• A "Government Center" team will operate from the Presidency to  2022) of the plan, the coordination will be carried out in two ways:
facilitate the implementation of the Plan. This group will be composed  • With MIDEPLAN and the Treasury, to review, align and prioritize 
of political authorities and their appointed technical teams and will  public investment processes will be carried out.
have representation from the Presidency, MIDEPLAN, Finance and   • With the Strategic Areas of Presidential Coordination, the creation 
MINAE. of work teams responsible for promoting the implementation of key 
  actions for the period 2018-2022 will be boosted. The teams must 
• To facilitate the implementation of the first policy package (2019- then coordinate from the strategic areas of presidential articulation.
Table 5: Presidential Articulation - Decarbonization Axis - Cross-cutting Strategies
Strategic Area of Presidential Articulation Plan Decarbonization Axis  Cross-cutting Strategy
Innovation and Competitiveness: Its objective is to offer and coordinate policies 
4: Renewable electricity at competitive cost
that promote innovation as a means to revitalize the national productivity and the  • Knowledge-based digitization
5: Sustainable Construction 
generation of quality employment at the central, regional and international levels, as  • Investment Attraction Strategy
6: Low Emissions Industry
well as knowledge transfer.
Infrastructure, Mobility, and Territorial Planning: aims to generate the necessary  1: Mobility and sustainable public transport
conditions of urban planning, territorial ordering, infrastructure and mobility to  2: Zero-emissions light transport   
achieve resilient, sustainable and inclusive urban and rural spaces . 3: Freight Transport and Sustainable Logistics. • Information and Transparency, and open 
Linked to line of action 10   data
Human Security: aims to devise and develop policies and strategies that allow for 
conditions that favor human development and the construction and preservation of  • Inclusion, Human rights and equality
protective environments..
Health and Social Security: aims to establish a comprehensive strategy for the  7: Integral Waste Management
prevention and  care of the people’s health, as well as for the consolidation of an  • Just Transition
equitable and sustainable social security system.
Education  for  Sustainable  Development  and  Coexistence:  aims  to  establish 
articulation strategies that promote the development of capacities for an effective  • Education and Culture for the Bicentennial
coexistence in society and incorporation into the market labor, as well as to allow a 
preparatory stance in facing the challenges of the fourth industrial revolution.  
Economic for Stability and Inclusive Growth: Its objective is to define, coordinate and 
• Green Tax Reform
monitor macroeconomic policies for economic stability, the promotion of production, 
• Financing for transformation
public investment and the reduction of inequality.
8: Agriculture Low in emissions
Territorial Development: aims to articulate, coordinate and monitor projects that 
9: Eco-competitive Livestock
generate inclusive growth and sources of employment, based on the particularities 
10: Territory management with solutions based 
of each territory
on nature
Reform Commission of the State  • Integral Institutional Reform
63• To monitor the Plan, an agenda and a tracking and monitoring  capital) and not on processes, have an adaptive capacity, and a 
mechanism will be designed by the Government Center team.  culture of service to citizens. It requires the use of technological tools, 
The technical proposal for tracking and monitoring will be  the internet of things, open data, and a capacity for multi-sectoral and 
designed by the Climate Change Directorate, together with a  multi-dimensional articulation. The priority reforms proposed are as 
MIDEPLAN team. The Government Center team will endorse it  follows:
and will issue instructions for its initial implementation. 
• The modernization of RECOPE: The institution must make use of the 
• The monitoring and coordination process will be reinforced  transition to modernize and to contribute to the country's energy 
with a multi-sectorial and multi-dimensional coordination  independence  in  the  context  of  a  deep  decarbonization  of  the 
from the Presidential Environmental Council, and this would  economy. The impacts of decarbonization on the fuel market – on 
be in collaboration with the other structures of the so-called  the short-, medium- and long-term - have to be evaluated to better 
climate change system which is comprised of: the Climate  identify the opportunities for the transition of RECOPE to an energy 
Change Coordination of the Environmental Sector Council,  system without emissions. Research and development (R&D), the 
the Climate Change Directorate, the Interministerial Technical  supply of new services related to zero-emissions fuels, as well as 
Committee, the Citizen Advisory Council on Climate Change  the requirements of the workforce to drive these changes have to 
(5C), and the Scientific Council on Climate Change (4C).   be further explored. This may include an analysis of the advantages 
and disadvantages of the use of biofuels and an analysis of the use 
of hydrogen in different applications. As it is a state company, law 
Eight cross-cutting strategies to  reforms and specific work strategies have to be promoted with the 
institution. 
promote change 
•  New  institutional  framework  for  sustainable  mobility:  Given  the 
In addition to the governance model for decarbonization that will 
importance of shifting the city model and the inclusion of new 
execute the plans and lead in this field, cross-cutting tasks are required 
paradigms, such as a public transport-oriented development, the 
in at least eight areas: 
redesigning of the institutional framework associated with public 
transport  and  urban  planning  is  necessary.  It  aims  to  have  the 
A. Comprehensive reform for the new Institutionality 
capacity to integrate and manage urban planning, development, 
of the Bicentennial  and transportation planning processes. Governance options have 
  to be evaluated based on examples and international best practices, 
The country needs to develop the project of institutional reform  and their advantages and disadvantages in the Costa Rican context 
in order to endow the country with a modern, digitized, flexible  have to be taken into consideration. Of the options to be explored, 
institutionality with the capacity to manage the disruptive changes  there includes the creation of an Urban Transport Authority, amongst 
that the new economy entails. The changes must be seen in an  others,  to  better  consolidate  the  processes  of  transport-oriented 
integral way and include institutions of the central level, along with  development.
autonomous institutions, and municipalities. The new institutional 
framework must base its actions on results (to guarantee natural  For  these  processes,  macro  aspects  will  be  analyzed  within  the 
64framework of the Committee of Notables and will be coordinated  C. Funding Strategy and Investment Attraction for 
with RECOPE, MOPT, the Public Transport Council (CTP) and others, 
transformation 
and they will be involved according to the specific proposals to be 
promoted.
Promoting  the  transition  process  will  require  public  and  private 
investments,  for  which  the  design  of  financing  strategies  that 
include "financial engineering" models, promotion of public-private 
B. Green Tax Reform
partnerships to support the portfolio of priority actions, projects, and 
change catalysts will be carried out. On the one hand, it will be key 
It will be necessary to disengage the revenues of the State from  to align international cooperation with public investment efforts and 
gasoline sales before boosting the massive electrification of the light- the mobilization of private funds. Furthermore, the prospect of the 
vehicle fleet. New revenue sources should be identified to replace  international cooperation promoting soft actions for the generation 
gasoline and automobile sales, and this should be done with a focus  of capacities, build enabling environments and implementing pilot 
on taxing negative externalities, such as air pollution. This reform  projects is considered; this must subsequently be scaled according 
would be of great importance as a first step in starting the process of  to public and private international and national financing programs. 
setting a carbon price in Costa Rica. The implementation of a carbon  The actions include integrated strategies to access climate facilities 
price will be an important driver in this transition, as it will create  financing (among other the Green Climate Fund (GCF), the Global 
an (increasing) price signal , with an effect that will impact multiple  Environment  Fund  (GEF),  the  Adaptation  Fund,  and  work  with 
sectors. The price may start with the green tax reform and the debate  binational  and  multilateral  cooperators,  investment  funds,  and 
on the economic valuation of negative externalities, such as pollution.  financial systems. Likewise, work will be carried out on the design 
The process must respond to an integral analysis of the country tax  of strategies that will attract direct foreign investment to engage 
structure and define actions that allow coherency to the public policy  companies that promote linkages and a consolidation of ecosystems 
packages of decarbonization, taking into account the distributive  innovation in key areas, such as electric mobility, digitalization, data 
costs of the various measures. The priority actions are: centers, smart cities, circular economy and climate-smart agriculture.
• A comprehensive analysis of the tax system and tax charges  Work  with  the  national  and  international  financial  sector  under 
towards consolidating a process of alignment of incentives and  innovative approaches to promote the investments attraction will be 
taxes with decarbonization objectives. carried out, and the creation of conditions that favor investment in 
• The  implementation  of  carbon  pricing  schemes,  such  as  the  key areas will be addressed, and these would be consistent with the 
Emissions Levy, to mobile and fixed sources. vision of the Plan. As part of the priority actions, the following stand 
• The consolidation process of the elimination of fossil fuel subsidies out:
• To consolidate the Portfolio of Priority Investments for the NDC.
The institution in charge of leading this strategy is the Ministry of Finance  • To design an Investment Attraction Plan aligned with the vision of 
(with collaborations from MINAE). transforming the country into a Laboratory for Decarbonization 
  and Resilience.
• To design tools aimed at facilitating the alignment and prioritization 
of the public investment system with key projects. 
65• To consolidate a structure to access Climate Financing or National  productive and commercial processes efficiency. The priority actions 
Designated Authority based on the Public Investment System of  are: 
the country (Ministry of Finance, MIDEPLAN, Central Bank, MINAE).  •  To design and implement a digitalization strategy for institutional 
• To analyze the feasibility of establishing funds or innovative financial  processes. 
schemes which consider the limited ceiling of fiscal indebted-ness.  •  To consolidate a "cluster" of data centers that promotes regional 
Some of the requirements identified include: Energy Transition  development outside the GMA. 
Fund, Key Infrastructure Fund for Decarbonization, Nature Based  •  To consolidate a data center that supports the government cloud 
Solutions Fund.  as part of the anchor project. 
•  To develop an Investment Attraction Strategy by data centers. 
For this process, international cooperation issues will be articulated  •  To support and promote the establishment of smart cities.
with MIDEPLAN and the Foreign Ministry, the Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) issues with the Ministry of Foreign Trade of Costa Rica (COMEX),  The Institution in charge of leading the strategy will be the Ministry 
the Investment Promotion Agency of Costa Rica (CINDE) and National  of Science, Technology and Telecommunications (MICITT) with the 
Promoter of Trade (PROCOMER), the public investment issues with the  support of the Costa Rican Electricity Institute (ICE) Group, MINAE, 
Treasury, MIDEPLAN; and the Central Bank for the processes associated  CINDE and PROCOMER.
with international cooperation and indebted-ness.
E. Labor strategies of "just transition" 
D.  Digitalization  and  Knowledge-based  Economy 
Strategy  The decarbonization of the economy will impact on the productive 
sectors and the labor markets associated with them. Costa Rica has, 
for the Bicentennial, been an imperative of "just transition" that goes 
The  country  must  progress  within  a  strategy  that  allows  the 
beyond  the  dimension  of  decarbonization  because  the  country 
accumulation, processing, and analysis of data to allow it to have 
is part of a transformation - and disruption – that is broader than 
competitive conditions in the new context of a knowledge-based 
many of those summarized under the concept of "Fourth Industrial 
economy. Hence, the country must improve in digital connectivity 
Revolution",  which  are  derived  from  the  transition  to  the  digital 
processes, in the development of tools for analysis and use of digital 
economy. Therefore, the political viability of these major transitions 
data, and in the availability of data centers infrastructure, fiber optics, 
will be associated with the process of adapting to the opportunities 
submarine cables, and interconnection with the region. The country 
and challenges that will arise in the labor market (ranging from the 
has excellent conditions in which to establish a "cluster" of data 
automation of a port to the transition to an economy of services that 
centers and operate as a regional hub. These conditions will allow 
is digitized) must be recognized. To identify the international best 
the country to take advantage of new trends in the sectors that are 
practices of just transition processes, evaluating their applicability in 
committed towards the consumption of renewable energy and the 
the Costa Rican context is necessary. 
establishing of smaller data centers that are closer to the demand 
points. The digitization processes, together with the provision of data 
Relevant plans to the sectors that are exposed to the greatest impacts 
center services and the internet of things, will allow a consolidation 
will  be  elaborated.  A  funding  strategy  must  be  included,  since 
of smart city systems and teleworking schemes, along with improve 
66intervention and communication strategies must be designed to  •  To launch an international strategy to promote the issue of human 
cater for the sectors that are directly affected.  rights and gender in the international agenda. 
The institution in charge of leading this strategy is the Ministry of Labor  •  To  consolidate  processes  for  the  formulation  of  new  climate 
(with the collaboration of MINAE, MIDEPLAN and with research support  policies with a focus on human rights and gender.
from the Central Bank regarding labor impacts on a macro level). 
G. Transparency, metrics and open data strategy
F.  Inclusion, human rights and promotion of gender   
equality  To measure the decarbonization of the country, the National Metrics 
of Climate Change System (SINAMECC) has to be consolidated as 
a sub-module of the National Environmental Information System 
The  transformation  processes  will  be  carried  out  under  integral 
(SINIA). This system has to be robust, efficient and flexible, along 
strategic considerations with a focus on human rights and gender 
with facilitating an access to information for citizens, businessmen, 
equality,  thereby  guaranteeing  a  respect  for  diversity  and  the 
municipalities and various public institutions. The SINAMECC must 
promotion of inclusion. On the one hand, the decarbonization of 
continue to formulate indicators of the transformational processes, 
the economy will generate opportunities and challenges that will 
since emissions are already a delayed indicator or "lagging indicator"; 
potentially affect the most vulnerable groups differently, and for this 
and progress needs to be monitored in order to rectify actions before 
reason, national policies, programs and projects with differentiated 
it is too late(other methods could include the import of oil barrels and 
approaches and disaggregated indicators should be designed to 
vehicle fleet growth, given the direct impact that it has on carbon 
measure the participation and the impact on these groups. Likewise, 
emissions). The digital revolution must rise along with a socialization 
women, youth, indigenous peoples and other groups can play a key role 
strategy of the metric in order to serve as a useful management 
as change actors in specific processes linked to energy transformation 
tool, rather than as a downloadable document to indicate how last 
and  independence,  the  rescue  of  cities  and  sustainable  mobility 
year’s emissions fared. Excellent information precedents exist in the 
approaches, models and technologies for the management of natural 
Central Bank and the Costa Rican Electricity Institute, and this can 
heritage (solutions based on nature). The country must continue 
serve as a quality standard to supply open and updated data on the 
its leadership in this area and promote the incorporation of human 
performance of the decarbonization agenda. Important steps have 
rights and gender approach in multilateral processes, particularly 
already been taken in that direction.
in  environmental  conventions  (Climate  Change,  Biodiversity,  and 
Desertification) and should articulate novel national processes that 
The institution in charge of leading this strategy is MINAE (with the 
operationalize these approaches, thus strengthening structures, such 
collaboration of the Climate Change Directorate, Secretariat of Planning 
as those of the Citizen Advisory Council on Climate Change 5C, where 
of the Energy Subsector, ICE, RECOPE, MAG, MIDEPLAN).
there is representation of several of these groups. The immediate 
actions are:   
•  To promote representativeness and gender parity in the current  H. Education and Culture Strategy: a Bicentennial Costa 
governance structures of the climate change system.  Rica free of fossil fuels
•  To include the National Women's Institute (INAMU) in the inter-
institutional governance structures of the climate system. 
President Alvarado made a cultural call in his inaugural speech by 
67stating that "we have the titanic and beautiful task of abolishing the use  example, in science and civics). At the same time, linking elements 
of fossil fuels in our economy to create a pathway for the use of clean and  of  decarbonization  in  the  communication  strategy  of  the  "Costa 
renewable energies. Decarbonization is the great task of our generation,  Rica Bicentennial" can also be considered. In practice, a partnership 
and Costa Rica must be among the first countries in the world to achieve it,  between the State and civil society to inform cultural and educational 
if not the first". While this goal requires a decarbonization strategy that  initiatives is possible. 
is armed with concrete sectorial actions, it also requires educational 
campaigns  which  ascribes  to  the  best  international  practices  for  The institution in charge of leading this strategy is the Ministry of 
consumers and users in order to promote acceptance in the value  Public Education (with the collaboration of the Ministry of Culture, 
proposal of technologies and modalities. Inspiring approaches can be  MINAE and MICITT).
explored to make schools and colleges a part of this transition (for 
Box 9
Indicative examples of links between the 10 decarbonization lines of action and the 8 transversal strategies
The "Costa Rica 2050 Plan" that MIDEPLAN is heading will deepen the links that exist between the decarbonization lines of action and the 8 transversal strategies. 
Some linkages are very visible and will call for the coordination between key institutions of various lines of action and transversal strategies. For example, the increase 
in electricity demand that will result from the electrification of buses, a possible electric train and a zero-emissions vehicle fleet (line of action 2) and the actions of 
line 4, which  focuses on strengthening the electrical system - and the creation of a recharge infrastructure. In other cases, the integration task will be more complex.
Simultaneously, a delineation of the times and impetus level of the transversal strategies found within the transformation periods that are associated with the 10 lines 
of action is necessary. The creation of a tax associated with carbon emissions will depend on the green tax reform. Once created, it will result in a possible source of 
financing for the lines of action. For example, it could be a motor for change that is offered in the industry and stimulate investments so that the productive sector 
makes investments in zero- and/or low emissions technologies.
With regard to the transport line of action (1, 2, 3), strong links can be created with the transversal educational and cultural strategy as an educational campaign for 
students that would allow the uniting of clean transportation issues with the aspiration of the Costa Rica Bicentennial, as mentioned by the President in his inaugural 
speech. I.e. being free of fossil fuels.
68Analysis of impacts
Managing the impacts of the transition is crucial for the practical success of the economy 
decarbonization strategy. The vision of the Administration Alvarado Quesada contains a strong 
call for Costa Rica to make a successful transition to the so-called "Fourth Industrial Revolution" 
- and the decarbonization that it entails - which must be socially fair. A first step toward the 
"transition management" would be to identify the main impacts. For instance, on the labor 
market level and at province level, the identification of these impacts should take into account 
the recognition that they can show differently in the urban and rural economy. To do so, the 
National Decarbonization Plan must be complemented with several detailed impact analyses. 
These analyses include at least two types of questions:
Analysis of the costs and benefits associated with the main decarbonization measures
At the international level, there is a growing effort to quantify the health benefits that are derived 
from decarbonization policies. For example, the International Energy Agency has calculated 
that with a 7% increase in the investment required to achieve clean air policies by 2040, 3 million 
people can be saved from premature death. In the US alone, 175,000 people will be saved from 
dying prematurely by 2030 if their country implements climate policies with an emphasis on 
renewable energy.
This type of quantification is vital in addressing the bias found in public debates that tends to 
focus narrowly on a single piece of data: the incremental cost of clean technology (for example, 
the higher price of an electric bus versus a diesel one). To overcome this bias, it is important to 
count on the quantification of the economic benefits that come from reducing oil consumption 
or the diseases associated with polluted air. The UN Environment estimates that if all buses and 
taxis in San José were made to run on electricity by 2030, 406 deaths associated with poor air 
quality would be avoided, $436 million would not be spent on international fuel purchases and 
the equivalent of 4 million tons of carbon would not be emitted 19.
In Costa Rica, this type of quantification has begun. For example, PIMUS, a project of the IDB 
_______________________________
19   MOVE, “E-Mobility Assessments” ¿Te imaginas tu Ciudad con Transporte Público 100% Eléctrico?: San José” http://
movelatam.org/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/MOVE_28.11.2017_eMobility-City-Assessments_CRC_SANJOSE.pdf  
Julio 30, 2018. 
69and the Government of Costa Rica, established a cost of the negative  In Spain, an analysis of the economic impact of the electrification of 
externalities  associated  with  the  transport  model  of  the  GMA  -  all transport by 2030 has been completed in 2018, and it determined 
inefficient, uncoordinated and polluting - for the country. It was  the expected net gain of jobs (quantifying both the jobs created, and 
estimated at $ 2,864 million per year: $ 17 million for greenhouse gas  the jobs removed) . For example, the study showed that the transition 
emissions, $ 177 million for poor air quality, $ 112 million for noise,  could create up to 23,185 net jobs while reducing CO2 emissions by 
$ 1,864 million for accidents and accidents and, $ 691 million for  28% in 2030, along with reducing emissions of pollutants, such as 
congestion. To change the current transport system, an approximate  nitrogen oxides particles, by up to 92% and 89%, respectively. The 
investment of $ 3,500 million is required. If the PIMUS is applied, it  efficiency improvement and the use of zero-emissions vehicles will 
is calculated that 70% of the negative impacts would be reduced by  also reduce CO2 emissions, as well as generate an estimated GDP 
2035. This type of quantification is necessary to show that it is not only  benefit increase of 3.191 million euros. By importing less oil, less 
a "cost" for the country but that the investment could be recovered in  capital leaves the country, reducing these incurred costs on capital 
two years of PIMUS application if the negative externalities suffered  by € 4,583 million. This type of analysis should be carried out in the 
by the population are accounted for,  such as the damages to their  Decarbonization Plan of Costa Rica, and should make use of the 
health and the economy, due to accidents, pollution and congestion. methodologies that are already used internationally. 
Analysis of the impact of decarbonization in the labor market Analysis of the best practices that emerge in the context of a "just 
transition" towards the fourth revolution and zero-emissions economy 
A  decarbonized  economy  creates  jobs.  The  International  Work 
Organization  (IWO)  estimates  that  the  renewable  energy  sector  At an international level, the IWO has initiated a dialogue with other 
will  create  64  million  jobs  worldwide.  However,  other  jobs  will  institutions to create guidelines that not only identify the creation of 
inadvertently disappear. Therefore, methodologies have been defined  "green jobs" but also guide just transition processes in the context 
in order to determine the net impact on the labor market. of a transition to a green economy. The international debate points 
to the importance of creating transition and adaptation strategies 
In Costa Rica, this type of analysis has to be carried out by sector and  for businesses, communities and workers that are affected by the 
for the entire economy. For example, methodologies could be applied  changes made towards new technological paradigms.
to evaluate the impact of the transport decarbonization on the labor 
market in order to find out the net effect on both the transportation  Some international experiences have suggested the need for early 
and fossil fuels associated when making the transition from internal  lessons. For example, transitions lessons to avoid adverse impacts at 
combustion engines to electric motors. work have been gleaned from coal and industrial transformations: 
anticipation of the process (not denying it), developing local economic 
resilience, investing in human capital, and coordinating with local 
_______________________________ affected parties.
20   See “Repostando hacia el Futuro: Como Propulsar la Economía Dejando Atrás 
el Carbono” (2018) por ECODES, Transport & The Environment and Cambridge  The "Just Transition Center", which was created in 2017, focuses on 
Econometrics. 
70decent jobs and climate protection to help its affiliates with just  strategy to phase out coal plants if accompanied with a process was 
transition policies. For example, the Netherlands unions agreed to a  designed to identify and finance retraining needs.
71Section 7: 
Conclusions: Five priority actions
Successful  decarbonization  requires  the  establishing  of  a  pragmatic  only in transportation but also in the industrial sector.
agenda  and  priorities.  Short-,  medium-  and  long-term  actions  are 
required in the 10 decarbonization axes along with the 8 cross-cutting  3. The energy policy will have to establish guidelines so that 
strategies with strong institutional arrangements. A frequent question  electricity supply planning can consider both new technological 
among decision makers between 2018-2022 would thus be: what are the  supply options and the transformations of the medium- and 
5 priority actions starting this month? long-term demand. In the short-term, the premise must be that 
the public electricity supply service is competitive with regards 
Given the presidential mandate to place Costa Rica in a leadership role, it is  to energy alternatives with a greater carbon component. For this 
essential to prioritize two sectors that contribute the most to carbonization  purpose, the tariff policy of the different energy sources has to be 
of the Costa Rican economy – the transport and agricultural sectors -  reviewed; and the distortions that are against the decarbonization 
through an implementation of actions that could generate benefits for  process, as well as the inefficiencies of the electrical development 
citizenship and the productive sector: that affect its competitiveness, have to be rectified.
1. 1. To set off the transformation of public transport with an  4. To avoid technological pathways in energy and transport that 
emphasis on creating route systems adjusted to present and  present limited opportunities to partially reduce emissions 
future demand and these would provide rapid and direct routes  and are not aimed at a transition of "zero-emissions". These 
to users within a modern urban model. The most concrete step of  may postpone or hinder the change to clean technologies which 
this investment in public transport would be bus electrification, which  are in line with the goal of decarbonization. The period is too short 
will improve air quality and reduce greenhouse gases emissions. to invest in "bridge" technologies as they result in committed 
emissions and will divert investment capital from being aligned 
2. To accelerate and scale the actions in the agricultural sector  with the decarbonization goal. 
activities that produce the most emissions - in particular, implement 
mitigation actions in coffee and livestock (known as "NAMAS") -  Given that the decarbonization agenda is part of a wider green 
without losing sight of the need to identify or to develop additional  economy agenda, it is vital to start the process of two cross-
options of decarbonization in these sectors – thereby ensuring that  cutting reforms in 2019, without which the decarbonization of 
Costa Rican agriculture is one of the most sustainable in the world,  the Costa Rican economy will not be viable: 
and allowing for its differentiation and commercial benefits.
5.The  first  is  the  environmental  institutional  reform,  which 
The foundation must be laid for the electrification of the economy - not  starts  with  the  reform  of  RECOPE  and  the  institutional 
72framework to promote sustainable mobility approaches to lay the foundations of a deep 
decarbonization process. The second is the green tax reform aimed at promoting the actions 
of sustainable development and green growth. The latter is vital in a Costa Rican context, 
particularly as a new 21st century fiscal model is debated. In the reform, tax collection would 
increase based on pollution and other negative externalities, and fiscal benefits would be 
offered to activities that contribute to decarbonization and green economy. 
The task that Costa Rica has ahead requires substantial changes. This requires adapting institutions 
and procedures to changes, and would also be an opportunity to make transformations that - 
if they are achieved - will bring concrete benefits for the country in terms of life quality and 
job creation, along with in efficiency and leadership. Fundamental changes are necessary to 
move towards a successful Bicentennial Costa Rica. Therefore, it is worth reiterating the words 
that President Alvarado so eloquently noted on May 8: "This country was not built by always 
repeating the same ideas". It is a reminder that it is time to take the first steps; not towards 
becoming one of the first decarbonized countries in the world, but towards becoming the first.
73ANNEXES
74Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
  1.1.1 To implement the sectorization of the public  MOPT
F. Reinforcement  transport services, in bus modality, in a manner  CTP
of the principles of  aligned with the mobility needs of the citizens, and  ARESEP
inclusion, respect for  firstly focused on the GMA. INCOFER
human rights Quantity of operating  MINAE
and promotion of  • 8 main trunk lines  sectorized trunks  o To reorganize public transport routes; set trunk  Private sector
gender equality: inoperation lines into operation in exclusive lanes. Users
- To ensure that fares  o To modernize the concession scheme for 2021,  Bank
guarantee a universal  which will reward efficient and decarbonized  MIVAH
access to public transport. service provision. IFAM
o To develop a profitable and innovative 
financial model that promotes efficiency and 
transparency in the service operation.
 A. Comprehensive 
reform for the new
institutionality of the 
Bicentennial: At least one public  Number of public  1.1.2 To establish and operate an efficient and  MOPT
- Efficient organization of  transport mode  transport modes with an  accessible Electronic Payment system for bus and  CTP
1. Development of a  the transport sector and  operates with a system  operational electronic  train services. Central Bank 
mobility system based  1.1 To modernize public  territorial planning with  of integrated electronic  payment INCOFER
on safe, efficient and  transport and to create  an integrated governance  payment. ARESEP
renewable public  an integrated and  system Operators
transport and active  intermodal system.
mobility schemes. 1.1.3 To adopt measures that promote  MOPT
intermodality. CTP
o To design and implement intermodal stations  INCOFER
(train-bus-taxi-bicycles). IFAM
G. Transparency,  o To design and adjust the schedules for the 
metrics and open data  provision of public transport services in a way 
strategy. that promotes systems integration.
- To develop strategies 
innovative to capture 
Mobilization data from 
the population.
- To make available in  1.1.4 To establish a governance model under the  MOPT
open data format on  sustainable mobility system approach. CTP
routes and service of   1.1.4 To establish a governance model under the  ARESEP
public transport in real  sustainable mobility system approach. INCOFER
time (such as General  o To strengthen the capacities and transparency of  MINAE
Transit Feed Specification  the Public Transport Council and the stewardship  Private sector
(GTFS). of the Ministry of Public Works and Transport  Usuarios
75Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
(MOPT).
o To articulate joint approaches to land use d 
planning and transport planning.
*Avoid the lock- Electric Train document 1.1.5 To progress in the construction of the Electric  INCOFER
in:  Train under the most feasible model, connecting  Presidency
•-Avoid el fomento  Electric train  Cartago, San José, Heredia and Alajuela.  MOPT
y la adopción de  o To carry out feasibility and environmental  ICE
las tecnologías  impact studies.  Municipalities
de transporte  o To design the construction plans. 
“transicionales”  o To prepare international bidding 
que creen barreras para  documents for the design, construction and 
la descarbonizació operation phase. 
n del sistema de  o To bid for the concession of the electric 
transporte en el  train construction
mediano y largo plazo. • To develop a financial and technical 
strategy for the construction and 
commissioning of the Electric Train 
aligned with a vision of intermodality and 
sustainable mobility.
F. Reinforcement  • To implement electric  Number of routes with  1.1.6. C6 To implement campaigns that  MOPT
of the principles of  pilot buses on at least 2  working pilot electrical  promotes the use of public transport and  MINAE
inclusion, respect for  public transport routes.  buses   intermodality.   (Quick Win) Presidency
human rights • To realize contracts of 
and promotion of  concession of bus service 
gender equality: which includes specific  Concession contract  1.2.1 To establish the electrification of public  MINAE
- To ensure that fares  goals and conditions  document transport program, which will include the  MOPT
guarantee a universal  associated with the use  implementation of three electric buses pilots,  CTP
access to public  of electric buses or zero- financing alternatives and incentives to test the  ARESEP
transport. emissions.  Bus mode includes  process at the level of transportation companies  ICE
  specific goals and  level, considering tariffs that facilitate the  Buses Operators
conditions associated  inclusion of the technology in the model of  Users
with the service provision.     
use of electric buses or  o To implement three electric buses pilots - 
zero-emissions buses launched in June 2018 on the GMA routes. 
o To design and approve the tariff scheme 
76Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
C. Funding Strategy  appropriate to the use of new technology 
and Investment  in public transport, in order to ensure the 
Attraction for  affordability of the rates. 
transformation: o To design financing alternatives and incentives 
- To establish financial  for concept proof at the level of transport 
strategies that promote  companies. 
the efficient transition  o To define a joint and integral line of action. 
to technologies o To establish a schedule for the implementation 
zero-emissions. of the fleet electrification. 
- To encourage the  o To align concession contracts of 2021 with 
supply of green credits. objectives and goals of the Decarbonization 
- To explore subsidies. Plan and Law 9518: Incentives and Promotion 
- To explore the  for Electric Transportation. 
implementation of 
innovative operating 
models for electric  1.2.2 To identify and evaluate the best options to  MOPT
buses and taxis, such as  electrify the taxi fleet.   CTP
leasing. o To analyze the implications of the tariff scheme  ARESEP
and identify improvements to facilitate  MINAE
technology adoption in taxis.  ICE
o To identify financing scheme to facilitate  Cooperativas de Taxistas
renewal of the taxi fleet.  Bank
o To design a pilot program for the electrification 
of taxis.
G. Transparency, 
metrics and open 
data strategy: To design and officialize 
- To ensure transparency  a Roadmap for the  Cluster Roadmap  1.2.3. To explore the technical and financial  MOPT
and accountability consolidation of the  Document feasibility of creating a public fund to improve  CTP
in the provision of the  Hydrogen Cluster.  the conditions of the transition to electric public  ARESEP
licensed public transport  transport. MINAE
service. Bank Multilateral y 
- To generate open data  nacional
about the performance 
of the different  1.2.4.  To design a plan to promote hydrogen and  MINAE
technologies other zero-emission technologies. MOPT
o To define the Roadmap to consolidate a  RECOPE
Research and Development (R&D) cluster in  ARESEP
Hydrogen  Bank
*Avoid  lock-in:  o To implement the inter-institutional action  Academy
--Avoid the promotion  plan to promote the use of hydrogen in the  Private companies
and adoption of transport sector.
77Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
transport technologies o To conduct pre-feasibility studies of the 
"that create barriers to  identified key projects, and define a business 
decarbonisation of the  model
transport system in the  o To design the pilot project of hydrogen public 
medium and long- buses
term. More modelling  o To publicize the lessons in terms of costs, 
exercises must be  performance and infrastructure.
realized for informed 
decision-making 1.2.5  To analyze the options for new  MOPT
undertakings and business models to  MINAE
  promote shared mobility schemes in the  MEIC
country.  MICITT
Business incubators
A. Comprehensive  The implementation  Number of 
reform for the new  of transport-oriented  municipalities 
institutionality of the  development and low  implementing  1.2.6.  To launch communication campaigns  MOPT
Bicentennial: emissions practices in at  transport-oriented  that promotes public transport and zero- CTP
- Efficient organization  least 3 municipalities.    development practices emissions.  MINAE
of the transport sector  o To communicate about the benefits of  Presidency
and territorial planning  zero-emissions public transport in the long-
with an integrated  term and its relationship with the goal of 
governance system. decarbonization. 
- Alignment of the  o To raise awareness about pioneer bus 
plans goals and projects  companies with zero-emission technologies. 
associated with spatial  o To raise awareness about real-time 
planning in order to  information of an air quality monitoring 
promote sustainable  system to warn the population about high 
cities. contamination situations. (Quick Win):
The participation of 16  Number of 
municipalities in the  municipalities  1.3.1 To review and adjust the Regulatory Plans  Municipalities
2nd “cantonal” category  participating in the  and other territorial management tools in order  INVU
of the National Carbon  Carbon Neutral Program  to promote low-emissions development oriented  MIVAH 
G. . Transparency,  Neutral Program (PPCN).  2.0 to transport.  IFAM
metrics and open o To adjust the regulatory plans and urban  MINAE
data strategy: development regulations to ensure that their 
-To promote the  formulation promotes a low-emission and 
generation and  transport-oriented development. 
publication of more  o To identify the necessary adjustments in 
open data at the  the approved regulatory plans of the GMA to 
cantonal level to  comply with the above statement. 
78Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
improve environmental,  o To articulate the urban, residential and 
climate and urban  commercial development policies with the 
management and city    transportation plans and land use planning
planning.
1.3.2. To promote dense and compact city models.  Municipalities
o To promote cantons densification and  Presidency
compactness around the electric train. INVU
o To design programs and incentives to  MIVAH 
promote the model of compact cities. IFAM
INCOFER
MOPT
MINAE
H. Education and 
culture strategy:
A Bicentennial Costa  1.3.3. To promote sustainable mobility in cities,  Municipalities
Rica free of fossil fuels with special emphasis on the promotion of active  INVU
- To promote cultural  modes. MIVAH 
change towards the  o To design and implement walkable city plans  IFAM
use of sustainable  in the major urban centers of the country,  MINAE
mobilization modes,  including intermediate cities. MOPT
with an emphasis on  o To design and implement integrated plans  Presidency
active mobility. to promote the use of bicycles, which consider 
- To communicate about  cyclo-inclusive infrastructure.
the benefits of living in  o To encourage innovation in the design and 
compact cities and their  implementation of measures that promote 
associated inhabitants’  sustainability in cities, in both the public and 
rights. private sector, and in civil society.
*Avoid el lock-in: 
-To avoid the promotion 
and adoption of 
"transitional"  1.3.4. To implement demand management  Municipalities 
transportation  measures. MOPT
technologies that  o To expand the plate-based vehicular restriction  MIVAH 
create barriers for the  to other urban centers such as Cartago, Heredia,  IFAM
decarbonization of the  and Alajuela. MINAE
transport system in the  o To promote the development of parking policies  Presidency
medium- and -long  on public roads to limit parking areas on them
term. 
79Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
1.3.5 To actively involve municipalities in the  Municipalities
transition to low-emission development. Presidency
o To implement infrastructure construction  MIVAH 
plans for active mobility (sidewalks, bike lanes)  IFAM
in priority municipalities.  MINAE
o To increase the number of municipalities  MOPT
participating in the cantonal category of the 
"Cantonal Carbon Neutral Country Program 
2.0”, as well as the development of mitigation 
strategies and pilot projects at a cantonal level 
in key sectors such as sustainable mobility, 
electric mobility and waste management.
. (Quick Win)
80Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
2.1.1 To publish a National Electric Transportation  Presidency
Plan and generate complementary regulations  MINAE-
(guidelines, regulations and standards) to  SEPSE
F. Strengthening  operationalize Law 9518 on incentives and  MOPT
of the principles of  promotion of the electric transport.  Legislative Assembly
inclusion, respect for  To progress on regulations prohibiting the  Importers
human rights and  The National Electric  Published documents  importation of light-duty vehicles that use 
promotion of gender  Transportation Plan  (Plans and norms) fossil fuels. 
equality: and complementary 
- To create a system  regulations to  2.1.2 To promote the implementation of the  Presidency
that does not punish  operationalize Law 9518  Sectoral Agreement on Emissions Reduction in  MOPT 
the socially vulnerable  are published.   the Transport Sector.  MINAE
populations.
2.1. To accelerate the  2.1.3 To implement transition plans for zero- Presidency
transition of the vehicle  emissions transport in institutional fleets.  MINAE-
fleet towards zero- B. Green Tax Reform: Number of zero- o To adjust state procurement schemes.  SEPSE
emissions technology - To reduce the fossil fuel  emissions institutional  o To implement pilot programs to change  MOPT
2. Transformation of  dependence of the State  fleets institutional fleets. MINSALUD
the light-duty vehicles  revenue. Zero-emissions fleets  o To consolidate transformation program of 
fleet to zero-emissions,  -  The principle "The one  acquired in at least 3  commercial fleets in pilot sectors, e.g.: Tourism. 
boosted by renewable  that pollutes pays" is  public institutions
energy, not by fossil  considered 2.1.4 To consolidate programs for the repair and  INA
origin maintenance of zero-emissions vehicles. (Quick  Private businesses
win)  MINAE
o To expand the INA capacity building 
E. “Just Transition"  programs in repair and maintenance of electric 
labor strategies: vehicles. 
- To train mechanics and 
other populations who  2.1.5 To consolidate the "Fast Charge Network" for  ICE
need support for the  electric transport.  Electric distribution 
transition. o To set up fast recharge centers distributed  companies
throughout the country.  MINAE
o To analyze business models that encourage 
the private sector to accelerate the 
H. Education and  consolidation of fast recharging points.
culture strategy: A 
Bicentennial Costa Rica  2.2.1 To launch zero-emissions transport  MINAE- 
free of Fossil Fuels promotion campaigns. (Quick win) SEPSE
- To communicate  69 fast recharge centers  Number of operating  o To develop educational campaigns to cut down  MOPT
about the benefits of  operating by 2022.   recharge centers myths associated with electric technology in  MINSalud
vehicles. Presidency
81Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
migrating to zero- 2.2.2 To design financing mechanisms for  MINAE
emissions transport  the energy transition, including banking and  Min of Financy
insurance facilities for zero emission technologies. Multilateral y
national Bank 
2.2.3 To launch vehicle scrapping pilot program. MINAE
To avoid "lock-in" o To define a "roadmap" for the implementation  MOPT
To avoid the promotion  of the scrappage model and business scheme. Ministerio de Salud
and adoption of  Importers vehículos
transport technologies 
called "transitional" 
that create barriers for  2.2.4 To design a roadmap for the efficient  MINAE- 
the decarbonization  management of electric vehicle batteries at the  SEPSE
2.2. To improve the  of transport system  end of their life cycle.  MOPT
efficiency of the  in the medium- and  • To analyze possible business models under the  Ministerio de Salud
combustion fleet.  long-term.  circular economy approach. Private businesses
2. Transformation of 
the light-duty vehicles  2.2.5 To consolidate the development of the 
fleet to zero-emissions,  national biofuels industry. RECOPE
boosted by renewable  o To implement the National Biofuels Strategy. MINAE
energy, not by fossil  o To implement demonstration projects with the  SEPSE
origin E. "Just Transition"  Incorporation of 5% to  Percentage of ethanol  MAG. ARESEP
labor strategies: 10% of ethanol in both  mixed with gasoline  o To analyze potential vertical integration of  MAG
- To ensure that biofuel  gasolines by 2022.  RECOPE in agroindustrial chains, for example  Producer Chambers
production does not  palm trees.
relocate agri-food land  o To mix ethanol of national origin with gasoline. 
or encourage land use  o To mix biodiesel of national origin with diesel.
change.
2.2.6 To design LPG Use Roadmap for specific  MOPT
niches coherent with global decarbonization  MINAE 
goals. SEPSE
o To design adequate standards and regulations to  RECOPE
regulate LPG conversion processes in the existing 
G. Transparency,  Roadmap for production  Roadmap document fleet.
metrics and open  and use of biodiesel.
data strategy: 2.2.7 To update regulations to improve the quality  MINAE
- To make available, in  of fuels. Min Salud
open format, data on  o To adjust Central American regulations. MOPT
vehicle efficiency and  COMEx
82Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
factory model data, such  2.2.8 To improve and update the energy efficiency  MINAE
as driving efficiency and  regulations for the transport sector by updating  MINSALUD
other variables. Eco-Labeling of the  the standards for the import and circulation of  MOPT
. efficiency of designed  internal combustion engine vehicles, improving  COMEx
vehicle. fleet standards. 
o To implement an eco-labeling in electric and 
combustion vehicles to make visible the vehicles 
efficiency.
2.2. To improve the 
efficiency of the 
combustion fleet.
83Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
D. Digitalization  3.1.1 To implement measures that improve the  Presidency
and Economy-Based  distribution of cargo in agreement with the  MOPT
Strategy: Logistics and Cargo Plan. COMEX
- Use of data from load  To create consolidation centers or logistics  MEIC
mobilization to improve  activity zones (including scanners and  Private sector 
strategies planning that  other intelligent merchandise management  Municipalities
lead the sector to be  At least 1 cargo logistics  Cargo logistics pilot  systems) in the peripheries of the GMA and  IFAM
more competitive and  pilot project operates  project other emerging population centers.
decarbonized. under low-emission  o To define peripheral routes and schedules 
parameters. that limit the access of heavy trucks to urban 
E. "Just transition"  centers.
labor strategy o To establish pilot projects of centers of 
- Working conditions  consolidation and final distribution that 
of the drivers of cargo  combine technologies and various modes 
vehicles. of transportation, creating possible “low-
3. Promotion of a freight  3.1. To consolidate  emission areas”.
transport that adopts  the program of cargo  G. Transparency,  o To adequately divide loads so that the size 
modalities, technologies  logistics to reduce  metrics and open  of the cargo vehicles that circulate in urban 
and energy sources  emissions. data strategy: centers are proportional.
until achieving zero or  - To make available in 
the lowest emissions  open format, updated  3.1.2.  To generate open data to improve the 
possible data on behavior and  planning of light and heavy cargo transport .  MOPT
performance of the  (Quick Win) MINAE
light and heavy cargo  o To generate the following open data: age  COMEX
mobility. of the fleet, types of vehicles, operating  Private sector 
conditions, origins and destinations of the  Riteve
Limon’s Electric Freight  Limon’s Electric Freight  cargo, type of cargo, origin of the trucks 
Train (TELCA) in  Train (TELCA) operating  (domestic or foreign).
*Avoid  lock-in:  operation in 2022 o To evaluate the feasibility of designing a 
To limit the options that  Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) 
deepen dependence on  scheme to measure the emissions from the 
fossil fuels or generate  sector and from the transformation to a 
new dependencies. decarbonized one.
INCOFER
3.1.3 To integrate the intensive use of rail  MOPT
transportation for the mobilization of  Presidency
merchandise in the major routes and demand in  ARESEP
the distribution model and Pre-investment Study  COMEX
registered in MIDEPLAN cargo commercialization. ICOP
o To develop the necessary regulatory  Private sector
instruments for the implementation of 
84Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
the TELCA, including the establishment 
of the rates, prices or fares required for its 
implementation.
F. Strengthening  3.2.1  To design a plan for the technological  RECOPE
the principles of  efficiency improvement of the cargo transport  MINAE
inclusion, respect for  sector, which will consider aspects such as  SEPSE
human rights and  technological improvement (LPG, for example),  MOPT
promotion of gender  Plan to improve  the use of filters, biofuels and other efficiency  COMEX
equality efficiency and reduce  improvements. Private sector
- To ensure  emissions in the freight  Plan elaborated o To promote technologies such as LPG, 
that regulatory  transport sector.  use of filters, biofuels and other efficiency 
improvements do not  improvements.
shift the cost to primary  o To implement a pilot project of efficiency 
commodities, such as  improvement of the cargo transport.
3. Promotion of a freight  3.2 To promote  food.
transport that adopts  technological efficiency  3.2.2 To implement a pilot project of efficiency  MOPT
modalities, technologies  in heavy and light cargo  A. Comprehensive  improvement of the cargo transport. COMEX
and energy sources  transport sector reform for the new o To reinforce road emissions controls, of the  SEPSE
until achieving zero or  institutionality of the  compliance of standards and maintenance  Presidency
the lowest emissions  Bicentennial regulations for light and heavy cargo vehicles. MINAE
possible. - Efficient organization  o To manage the strengthening of Central 
of the cargo transport   1 pilot project to  Pilot project started American and national regulations linked to 
sector, to implement  improve the efficiency  efficiency standards, emissions, safety for light 
changes in regulations  of the freight transport  and heavy loads.
and their enforcement. sector (use of biofuels 
and LPG). 
3.2.3.  To adjust Law 9518 so that fiscal incentives  Presidency
*Avoid el lock-in:  also apply for electric light-duty vehicles Legislative Assembly
To generate  MINAE
improvements in the  Ministery of financy 
regulation and gradual 
standards that are 
consistent with the  3.2.4.  To establish a Pilot Plan to involve  MINAE
deep decarbonization  companies in the cargo transport sector in the  MOPT
process and which  Carbon Neutrality Country Program 2.0. Private sector
consider the availability 
of competitive 
technological options 
and the lifespan of 
assets.
85Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
C. Funding Strategy and  The upkeeping of a  4.1.1  To promote the diversification of the system  MINAE
Investment Attraction  renewable electric  with non-conventional renewable sources. SEPSE
for transformation: matrix above 95%  Percentage of  o To incorporate non-conventional renewable  CONACE
To assess the possibility  that boosts the  generation with  energies into the plans of generation  ICE
of creating an Energy  transition towards the  renewable energies expansion. Academy
Transition Fund decarbonization of other  o To promote research on non-conventional  ARESEP
sectors. renewable sources, as well as energy storage. Private sector
o To promote studies for the decarbonization of 
thermal energy support.
4.1.2To promote the electrification processes of 
D. Digitalization and  At least 2 sectoral plans  key sectors. MINAE
4. Consolidation of the  4.1 To promote the  Knowledge-based  and/or electrification  o To link the electric sectoral planning with the  SEPSE
national electricity  modernization of the  Economy Strategy strategies (eg,  Plan or strategy  sectoral planning of electric transport. MOPT
system with capacity,  electrical system to face  transportation,  elaborated o To promote the generation and exchange  INCOFER
flexibility, intelligence  the challenges coming  industry) prepared and  of information and databases between the  Private sector
and resilience, necessary  from decarbonization,  published different actors of intersectoral planning. ICE
to supply and manage  digitalization, and  o To estimate the demand projections between  Academy
renewable energy at a  decentralization in the  2020 and 2050 under scenarios that include: 
competitive cost electricity production. energy management and storage technologies, 
electro-mobility, energy efficiency and other 
elements that affect demand.
The installation and  Number of smart  4.1.3  To establish a national vision or strategy for  CONACE
operation of 274,240 of  meters installed and in  the operation of smart grids. MICIT
smart meters. operation  o To promote processes associated with 
digitization and establishment of smart 
networks.
o To purchase and install smart meters.
o To realize related investments in smart grid 
components.
o To monitor and analyses database 
information that supply the meters.
o To develop the strategy of institutional 
process digitalization and impulse for the 
consolidation of smart networks.
86Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
4.1.4  To design a plan for the improvement of  MINAE
climate investment that includes: SEPSE
o To establish governance in energy matters:  CONACE
Plan to improve climate   includes strengthening of the rectory, access to  ICE
investments for the  Improvement Plan information. ARESEP
national electricity  o To analyze current electrical legislation. CINDE
system. o To analyze distributed generation. Private sector
o To analyze system risks. Bank
o To review tariff structure.
o To re-adapt the financing models of the 
productive assets.
4.2.1  4.2.2 To promote energy efficiency: MINAE
4. Consolidation of the  o To implement a more effective planning and  CONACE
national electricity  coordination of energy efficiency.
system with capacity,  o To facilitate access to more efficient 
flexibility, intelligence  4.2 To promote energy  equipment by institutions, consumers and 
and resilience, necessary  efficiency An updated Energy  Approved Draft Law entrepreneurs.
to supply and manage  Efficiency Law and  o To update the list of efficient energy 
renewable energy at a  complementary  equipment that can be exonerated.
competitive cost regulatory framework. o To promote a culture of energy efficiency 
among citizens.
o To stimulate energy efficiency in macro-
consumers.
20 macro public  Number of consumers  o To promote energy consumption efficiency in 
consumers have  improving energy  the public sector.
improved their energy  efficiency o To adjust tariffs for the promotion of energy 
efficiency. efficiency.
Measurement of the 
effectiveness of the 
implemented energy 
efficiency measures
87Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
B. Green Tax Reform: 5.1.1 To create and improve the standards that  MIVAH
- To consider increasing  promote low-emission sustainable construction  INVU
taxes on the most  practices , such as energy efficiency (e.g.:  BANVHI 
polluting materials. temperatures insulation, cooking systems, water  MINAE
heating, washing and/or drying with electrical  CFIA 
technologies, solar thermal, air conditioning or  ECA
C. Funding Strategy  other more efficient and less polluting), efficient  INTECO
and Investment  use of water, low carbon footprint materials (e.g.,  Private sector 
Attraction for  • 20 new buildings  Number of buildings  cement and green concrete, wood and bamboo, 
transformation: applying environmental  that voluntary adopt  reuse of materials), among other sustainable 
- To develop  standards of a voluntary  environmental  practices that reduce the impact on emissions 
mechanisms to  nature. standards to improve  in the design, construction and operation of 
encourage sustainable  2019:5 their performance 21.  buildings and other infrastructures.
construction. 2020:5 o To generate regulations or promote the 
2021:5 existing ones for certifications, both for the 
2022:5 public and private sectors.
5. .Development of  5.1.To strengthen the  E. "Just transition"  Total: 20 o To strengthen the guidelines for low-emission 
buildings of different  regulations, standards  labor strategies: sustainable construction, for public buildings 
uses (commercial,  and incentives  - To analyze the social  and social housing through public biddings 
residential, institutional)  for the effective  impacts of changes in  among other identified effective mechanisms.
under high efficiency  implementation  subsidies on materials or  o To evaluate the feasibility of establishing 
standards and low- of sustainable  equipment. regulations for the adoption of sustainable 
emission processes construction practices  low-emissions construction practices in 
  in buildings and other  different types of buildings, for example: 
infrastructures affordable housing, commercial and residential 
buildings, among other buildings and 
infrastructure categories.
5.1.2 To identify incentive schemes to  MIVAH
promote low-emission construction (green  Ministery of financy 
credits, subsidies review, acknowledgments,  MINAE
certifications, awards) to accelerate the adoption  Bank
of these practices in private and public projects in  Private sector
accordance with the Sustainable Production and  INVU
Consumption Policy, among other regulations. BHANVI
_______________________________
20   Voluntary environmental standards are considered the following: Ecological 
Blue Flag Program   Sustainable Construction Category (recognition), standards and 
certifications: RESET, EDGE and LEED.
88Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
5.1. To strengthen the  5.1.3 To design a communication strategy  MINAE
regulations, standards  that facilitates access to information and  AYA- Comisión PBAE
and incentives  understanding about sustainable low-emissions  SEPSE
for the effective  construction.
implementation  • To communicate about existing regulations, 
of sustainable  standards, certifications and awards 
construction practices  that promote low-emission sustainable 
in buildings and other  construction, as well as bioclimatic design and 
infrastructures. technology options and their benefits.
• To progress in the environmental labeling of 
sustainable materials and efficient equipment, 
in line with the National Environmental and 
5. .Development of  Energy Labeling Program.
buildings of different  • To promote communication and awareness-
uses (commercial,  raising campaigns for people who will live in 
residential, institutional)  sustainable construction
under high efficiency 
standards and low- 5.2. To improve  C. Funding Strategy  At least 20 existing  Number of existing  5.2.1 To promote the implementation of energy  MINAE
emission processes operating practices of  and Investment  buildings implementing  buildings that  efficiency practices in existing buildings. ICE
existing buildings and  Attraction for  at least one action  implement at least one  • To promote the use of efficient, solar and  Private sector
other infrastructure  transformation: to reduce their GHG  GHG emission reduction  refrigeration equipment and natural or  Comisión PBAE
that significantly reduce  -To revise the  emissions in their  action in their operation  low Global Warming Potential (GWP) air-
their impact on GHG  formulation of the  operation. within the framework  conditioning systems (in accordance with the 
emissions. electricity tariff in  of one of the recognized  Kigali Amendment) in existing buildings.
order to encourage a  voluntary mechanisms.
greater electrification  5.2.2 To promote the implementation of  MIVAH
in new and existing  recognition programs such as the National Carbon  INVU
buildings. Neutral Program, and/or the Ecological Blue Flag  CFIA
- To analyze the  Program (PBAE) in its categories: Sustainable  Academy
feasibility of  Construction, Sustainable Homes, Communities  MINAE- SETENA
developing an  and Neutral Climate Community. (Quick win) AYA
Energy Transition  • To support the implementation of the 
Fund to replace and  Technical Regulation of Energy Efficiency and 
renew more efficient  Labeling for the Regulation of Refrigerators, 
equipment.  Refrigerators-Freezers and Freezers.
*Avoid  lock-in:  5.2.3 To promote the implementation of 
-To avoid using  bioclimatic design, the reuse of materials, low 
carbonized  carbon footprint materials such as cements and 
technologies, e.g., LPG  green concrete, as well as local inputs (wood from 
in cooking and water  national plantations and / or bamboo).
heating systems.
89Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
B. Reforma Fiscal 6.1.1  Actualizar y reactivar la estrategia
Verde:  industrial de cambio climático.
•  Exoneraciones  • Se deberá crear una comisión con 
o incentivos para  Al menos 2 de hojas  representación del sector industrial,  MINAE
calderas eléctricas. de ruta para la  instituciones públicas claves para impulsar la  MEIC
•  Reglamentar la  reducción de  Documento de  estrategia y las Hojas de Ruta.  MIDEPLAN
exoneración de  emisiones  Hoja de Ruta MICITT
equipos eficientes. ( 1 por tipo de   MINSALUD
industria) 6.1.2   Apoyar en la construcción de  Chambers 
D. Estrategia de  desarrollada  Hojas de Ruta para la reducción de Emisiones. Empresariales
financiamiento   y publicada Bank 
y atracción de  • Las Hojas de ruta definirán metas de  Academy
inversiones para la  reducción de GEI específicas por tipo de 
transformación: industria (basadas en la ciencia), que puedan 
• Fondo de Transición  traducirse en un compromiso del sector para 
 6.Transformation of  6.1 Impulsar el proceso  Energética. reducir emisiones de GEI (Hojas de Ruta con 
the industrial sector  de transformación  respectivos Acuerdos Voluntarios). 
through processes  tecnológica de bajas  G. Estrategia de   (Quick Win)
and technologies  emisiones del sector  transparencia,  • Caracterizarán los diferentes tipos de 
that use energy from  industrial métrica y datos  procesos de la industria de acuerdo con sus 
renewable sources or  abiertos  requerimientos energéticos y fomentarán la 
others, sustainable and  • Crear una plataforma  salida del uso de energía fósil por electricidad 
efficient, with low- and  de consulta y  Lista oficial de bienes  Documento de Lista de  renovable, bioenergía (generada a partir de 
zero-emissions. verificación y de  exonerados conforme al  bienes exonerados con  biomasa o residuos) y mejoras en eficiencia 
“benchmarks” de  artículo 38 de la Ley N°  inclusión de nuevos  energética.
resultados, informes  7447 del y sus reformas  equipos y tecnologías
y buenas prácticas  actualizada
empresariales. 6.1.3  Impulsar la eficiencia energética en los 
procesos industriales: (Ver vínculo con Eje 4)
• Promover buenas prácticas en la gestión de la 
energía (por ejemplo ISO 50001).
• Actualizar mediante la inclusión de nuevos 
*Avoid el lock-in:  equipos y tecnologías lista oficial de bienes 
•  Avoid el uso de  exonerados conforme al artículo 38 de la Ley 
tecnologías que  de Regulación del Uso Racional de la Energía, 
profundicen la  Ley N° 7447 del 03 de noviembre de 1994 y sus 
dependencia a los  reformas de acuerdo al artículo 10 del decreto 
combustibles fósiles  ejecutivo N° 41121 del 5 de abril del 2018.
en la industria. • Desarrollar reglamentos técnicos que aseguren 
la eficiencia energética de los equipos 
carbonizados.
90Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
6.1 . To promote the  At least 2 roadmaps for  Roadmap document 6.1.4  To facilitate the substitution processes of 
process of low- emissions reduction (1  refrigerants with low- or zero-GWP in accordance 
emissions technological  per type of industry)  with the Montreal Protocol and the Kigali 
transformation of the  developed and  amendment.
industrial sector published (e.g., Cement  o To align fiscal incentives (importation) to 
Sector). promote the use of natural refrigerants and the 
equipment that uses them, and discourage the 
use of refrigerants with a high GWP.
o To support pilot projects.
o To develop regulations for the adequate 
disposal of refrigerants and associated 
equipment.  (Quick Win)
 6. Transformation of  6.2 To promote the  D. Digitalization and  • An updated official list  List of exempted  6.2.1 To promote the production of sustainable 
the industrial sector  development and  Knowledge-based  of exempted goods by  goods including  goods and services that remove or reduce GHG  MEIC
through processes  consumption of  Economy Strategy  the Article 38 of Law N  new equipment and  emissions along the industry value chain. OMEX
and technologies  products and services  - Strategies for  ° 7447 on Regulation  technologies o To support the design of circular economy  PROCOMEINAE
that use energy from  under circular economy  exploring new  of the Rational Use of  models that promote waste valorization, the  MINSALUD
renewable sources or  models. materials, LCA. Energy. generation of new raw materials and are  Chambers Empresariales
others, sustainable and  inserted in the industrial and agroindustrial  MAG
efficient, with low- and  G. Transparency,  value chains (e.g., the use of waste from the  MICITT
zero-emissions. metrics and open  agro-food industry as raw material or energy  Hacienda
data strategy source in industrial processes). Academy
- To create a  o To promote the use of the LCA and life cycle  ECA 
platform of query  approach to determine the raw materials,  INTECO
and verification,  inputs, processes or others that minimize the 
benchmarks of products GHG emissions.
results, reports and 
business best 
practices.
91Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
6.2  To promote the  H. Education and  At least 3 products have  Quantity of products  6.2.2To promote the consumption of products 
development and  culture Strategy: a  an environmental label  with an environmental  and services with smaller footprints and 
consumption of  Bicentennial Costa  or seal based on the  label recognized by the  environmental impact.
products and services  Rica free of fossil  official scheme of the  Government of Costa  • To standardize the definition of "green" 
under circular economy  fuels:  Government of Costa  Rica products and services
models. - Campaign to promote  Rica. (Quick Win).
a circular economy  • To implement the National Environmental and 
which includes proper  Energetic Labeling Program for products with 
waste management. an LCA approach. 
(Quick Win).
•o  To develop and implement a Carbon 
Neutrality scheme in products under the 
Neutrality Carbon Country Program. 
(Quick Win).
•o  To improve the technical criteria 
used in sustainable public procurement to 
include the analysis of environmental labels 
recognized by the Costa Rican government. .
92Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
F. Strengthening 
7.1.1.  To design a mitigation strategy for  Municipalities 
the principles of 
emissions in the waste sector (NAMA). This  MIN Salud
inclusion, respect 
strategy will consider aspects such as: IFAM
for human rights 
o The encouragement of the treatment of  UGL
and promotion of 
organic waste at household level. MINAE
gender equality: 
o The encouragement of the treatment of  Grupo ICE
- Inclusion of women 
organic waste at industrial scale. Private sector 
and vulnerable 
o The promotion of the use of biodigestion as a  Sociedad Civil
populations in formal
treatment method for liquid and solid organic 
 jobs throughout the
2018-2022: 3,800  Indicator aligned  waste at large or multiple generators scale.
 integrated waste
tons of solid waste are  with the National  o To have a selective collection of non-
 management chain.
managed  daily. Development and  recoverable and recoverable waste (organic 
2019: 3.740 Public Investment Plan:  and inorganic) at the municipal level through 
B. Green Tax Reform
2020: 3.760 Number of tons of solid  a tariff scheme that allows to offer this public 
- To evaluate the
2021: 3.780 waste managed in an  service in an efficient way.
 possibility of
7. Development of an  7.1. To present policies  2022: 3.800 integral way on a daily  o To analyze the municipal tariff charged for 
 establishing tax
integrated system of  that promote the  basis. the collection of solid waste and to identify 
 incentives for the
maximum efficiency  integral management of  improvements options to promote the 
 importation of
and low greenhouse  low-emission waste and  improvement of the management.
 technologies for
gas emissions waste  circular economy
 the integral
management based on 
 management of 
the separation, reuse, 
waste with a focus
revaluation and final 
 on low emissions
disposal 7.1.2. To design technical and legal instruments to  MINSalud
control the import, manufacture and marketing  MINAE
C. Funding Strategy 
of products and materials that generate waste  Ministery of financy
and Investment 
which are challenging to manage for the country,  COMEX
Attraction for 
such as single-use plastics, or waste challenging  CINDE
transformation: 
to recycle, or with no valuation method. Private sector 
- Opening of special 
Sociedad Civil
credit lines for 
technology purchase 
NAMA Waste  7.1.3. To review the technical and legal  Ministerio de Salud
for
Development process instruments that allow applying the principle  MINAE
 the integral
of extended responsibility of the producer from  Ministery of financy
 management of waste
the importation, manufacture and marketing  COMEX
 with a technology
of products and materials to strengthen its  CINDE
 approach low 
implementation. Private sector 
emissions
_______________________________
21   2017: 3,720 tonnes per day integrally managed
93Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
Sociedad Civil
7.1.4.  To implement an environmental labeling  Ministerio de Salud
system for the products and materials marketed  MINAE
in the country that allows consumers to clearly  Ministery of financy
E. “Just Transition" 
Launch of the National  identify if the product or material is recyclable or  COMEX
labor strategies:
Composting Strategy not; and in which category it should be recycled,  CINDE
- To formally include 
using the color codes of the National Strategy for  Private sector 
the core sectors of the 
Separation, Recovery and Recovery of Waste. See  Sociedad Civil
waste recovery value 
linkage with the line of action 6. 
chain within municipal 
waste management 
processes.
7.1.5. To create the enabling conditions to  MINSalud
7. Development of an  7.1. Fortalecer la  enhance the use of biogas generated in  MINAE
H. Education and 
integrated system of  implementación de  Designed NAMA strategy  mechanized sanitary landfills for generating  Ministery of financy
culture Strategy:
maximum efficiency  políticas, estrategias y  to reduce emissions in  electricity or as a fuel for mobile and fixed  COMEX
- To involve civil society 
and low greenhouse  planes que promuevan  the waste sector.  sources. CINDE
organizations in the 
gas emissions waste  la gestión integral de   (Quick Win) Private sector
creation of a National 
management based on  residuos con un enfoque   Sociedad Civil 
Communication 
the separation, reuse,  de bajas emisiones de 
Strategy on Integrated 
revaluation and final  GEI bajo el concepto de 
Waste Management.
disposal. economía circular
7.1.6.  To promote productive linkages through  MINSalud
To avoid lock-in: 
public-private partnerships to strengthen the  MINAE
To avoid the 
recycling value chain from its source. Ministery of financy
implementation 
COMEX
of waste systems 
CINDE
treatment that implies 
Private sector 
dependence on their 
Sociedad Civil
generation instead 
of promoting the 
reduction of their 
generation. 
7.2.1. To strengthen the execution capacity and  AyA
To avoid obsolete 
dialogue of the governing entities in the control  MINSalud
technologies that delay 
and monitoring of the reports of water discharge  Municipalities
compliance with the 
without treatment or treatment plants and  IFAM
goals of this plan. 
septic tanks malfunctioning through the existing  MINAE
regulatory instruments. 
94Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
Goal aligned with PNDIP  Indicator aligned with  7.2.2. To strengthen the IT platform of the  AyA
A. Comprehensive  in priority sectors:  the PNDIP: Percentage  National System of Integrated Management of  Ministerio de Salud
reform for the new  Palmares, City of Jacó  of progress in sanitary  Water Resources (SINIGIRH) to collect data on the  Municipalities
institutionality of  Garabito, Golfito and  sewerage projects. entities that generate wastewater. IFAM
the Bicentennial: Ciudad de Limón22 .  MINAE
- To evaluate whether 
it is necessary to  2019-2022:
modify the Law of  100%
Integral Management  7.2.3.  To expand the coverage of sanitary sewer  AyA
of Water Resources  2019: 14,38% networks and treatment systems of ordinary  MINSalud
in order to improve  2020: 28,35% residential wastewater in the country.  Municipalities
the sanitation of  2021: 78,84% o To strengthen the wastewater treatment  IFAM
7. Development of an  wastewater. 2022: 100% infrastructure in the zones established by the  MINAE
integrated system of  7.2. To strengthen the  National Plan for Development and Public 
maximum efficiency  effective management  G. Transparency,  Investments. These zones are: Palmares, 
and low greenhouse  of wastewater. metrics and open  Quepos, Jacó, Golfito and Ciudad de Limón. 
gas emissions waste  data strategy  
management based on  - To strengthen the 
the separation, reuse,  National Information 
revaluation and final  System for Integrated 
disposal Water Resources 
Management 
(SINIGIRH).
.
7.3. To create  H. Strategy in  At least 1 executed  Number of outreach  7.3.1.  To massively launch dissemination and  MINSalud
enabling conditions to  education and  dissemination and  and awareness-raising  awareness campaigns on avoiding, reducing,  MEP
improve the integral  culture:  awareness campaign  campaigns on avoiding,  separating and treating waste. (Quick Win) MINAE
management of solid  - To involve civil  about avoiding,  reducing, separating  MEIC
and liquid waste at both  society organizations,  reducing, separating  and treating waste. Ministerio de 
residential and business  municipalities  and treating the waste.  Comunicación
levels and the business 
sector processes of 
_______________________________
22   Baseline: Palmares: Al 30-06-2018: 5,61% . Ciudad de Jacó, Garabito: Al 30-06-2018: 
6,24% . Quepos: Al 30-06-2018: 5,30% . Golfito: Al 30-06-2018: 5,30% . Ciudad de 
Limón: 30-06-2018: 9,08%
95Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
awareness-raising  7.3.2.To strengthen metrics and access to  MINAE
and training about  information on waste management in open  MINSalud
integrated waste  formats. Sociedad Civil
management. o To standardize methodologies for measuring 
and publishing data. 
G. Transparency,  o To publish data on waste management in an 
metrics and open  accessible manner.
data strategy:
To strengthen the 
National Information  7.3.3.  To strengthen the capacities of the  MINSalud
System for Integrated  At least 3 capacity  Number of capacity  municipalities about waste management. Public and private 
7. Desarrollo de un  Water Resources  building processes  building processes  o To design technical capacity building  Universities
sistema de gestión  Management  for municipalities  for municipalities  programs in low-emission waste management.  MINAE
integrada de residuos  7.3.  To create  (SINIGIRH). about integral waste  on integrated waste  o To strengthen the monitoring commissions  Municipalities
basado en la separación,  enabling conditions to  management.  management. Municipal Waste Plan. Private sector
reutilización,  improve the integral  To avoid lock-in: o To generate spaces to improve the  Bank 
revalorización y  management of solid  To avoid the  intermunicipal articulation in waste 
disposición final de  and liquid waste at both  implementation of  management (transfer centers).
máxima eficiencia  residential and business  waste treatment  o To strengthen the audit and report of the 
y bajas emisiones  levels systems that generate  municipalities.
de gases de efecto  dependence on their  o To create a database of municipal actions 
invernadero generation, instead  to exchange best and mal-practices of waste 
of promoting the  management.
reduction of their  o To increase the involvement of the 
generation. municipalities in the improvements of 
To avoid obsolete  waste management as a measure to reduce 
technologies that delay  emissions under the PPCN.
compliance with the 
goals of this plan.
At least 1 circular  Pilot projects of circular  7.3.4.  To generate spaces for a greater 
economy model pilot  economy models  involvement of the private sector. MINSalud
project promoting  generated to enhance  o To analyze the market of sellers and buyers  Universidades públicas 
integral waste  integrated waste  of waste. y privadas. MINAE
management  management o To make visible the “winners” of the private  Municipalities
implemented. sector in their work at municipal level. Private sector
o To determine the needs to promote the  Bank 
transformation of the sector and the search for  MEIC
circular economy models. See linkage with the 
line of action 6.
96Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
To promote the decarbonization and vertical  MAG
integration of the priority value chains. MINAE 
o To develop and consolidate processes- INDER
programs of NAMAs24 in priority products.  MEIC
C. Funding Strategy  Coffee: to consolidate the escalation stage,  PROCOMER
and Investment  Banano-Musaceas: to boost the initial process,  Academy
Attraction for  Sugarcane-rice: to initiate the processes. Chambers
transformation o To promote the identification, transfer and  SBD
- To align available  At least 2 new NAMAs  NAMA Proposal  adoption of technologies that reduce emissions  Bank  
financial instruments for  processes will be  signed between  and improve competitiveness at farm and 
the agricultural sector initiated representatives processing levels.
producers and MAG and  o To promote actions that facilitate the 
MINAE commercialization of low-emission products 
(among others, to promote labeling and 
differentiation processes, promotional 
8.1 To develop  campaigns linked to the country brand).
8. Promotion of highly  innovative processes  D. Digitalization and  o To promote circular economy processes 
efficient agri-food  in the value chain of  Knowledge-based  that promote the valuation and reuse of 
systems that generate  priority products23 that  Economy Strategy  agricultural organic waste, and other waste 
low-carbon export  facilitate the generation  - Precision generated along the value chain. See linkages 
goods and local  of decarbonized   agriculture, traceability  with the axes 7 and 8.
consumption goods  agricultural goods. technologies, 
Monitoring, Reporting 
and Verification (MRV)
8.1.2  To align the current agro-environmental  MAG
policies and plans with the decarbonization goals. MINAE 
o To implement the Sectoral Agreement to  INDER
Reduce Emissions in the Agricultural Sector.  MEIC
The agreement includes: PROCOMER
_______________________________
23 Product prioritization is related to the agricultural subsectors that generate the most emissions: livestock, coffee, sugar cane, bananas, rice. Other products could be incorporated if 
there is evidence of their impact on the generation of emissions within the agricultural sector.
24 In the Costa Rican context, NAMA is understood as a programmatic intervention that allows the identification of technologies for the reduction of emissions, allows the generation 
of training at the level of key structures MAG, ICAFE, Chambers, and producers to promote the adoption of technologies, encourages the development of MRV, and power vertical 
integration approaches to work equally with the marketing processes. At the national level, the learning of NAMA Café and NAMA Livestock will facilitate the operation of the proposed 
new NAMAs.
97Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
• To develop financial mechanisms aimed at  Academy
the implementation of efficient low-carbon  Chambers
technologies. SBD
• To develop a system of recognition of the  Bank  
eco-benefits generated by the farms in their 
sustainable and climatically responsible 
production.
• To consolidate the MRV system of the sector 
that supplies SINAMECC and GHG Inventory.
o To establish board agreements in relevant 
institutions (for example: INDER, INCOP, Banking 
System for Development, DINADECO, among 
others) to align and allocate resources for the 
8. Fomento de  8.1 To develop  development of decarbonization projects. (Quick 
sistemas  innovative processes  Win)
agroalimentarios  in the value chain of  o To align sub-sectoral policies and strategies 
eficientes que  priority products that  with the decarbonization objectives (e.g., Policy 
generen bienes de  facilitate the generation  / Strategy for coffee production, Musaceas, Caña, 
exportación  of decarbonized  etc).
y consumo local bajos  agricultural goods.
en carbono
_______________________________
25   El Acuerdo se firmó en el 2018 por ambos Ministros y tiene una vigencia de 5 años. Este 
acuerdo refleja la contribución sectorial a la meta nacional definida en la NDC. El acuerdo 
se puede encontrar en https://cambioclimatico.go.cr/ 
98Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
C. Funding Strategy  9.1.1 To consolidate the Low Carbon Livestock 
and Investment  • 1 guideline generated  Number of guidelines  Strategy (EGBC) as the policy to decarbonize the 
Attraction for  for the Low-Carbon  generated sector.
transformation: Livestock Strategy.  o To generate a guideline that consolidates the 
- To create credits to  Number of livestock  EGBC as the governing policy of the livestock 
support the strategy • 1773 livestock farms  farms implementing the  sector.
- To integrate  implementing NAMA  NAMA model  (Quick Win)
environmental and  technologies. MAG
social risk analysis into  Technological solution  9.1.2 To promote an eco-competitive livestock  INTA
the financial sector. • 1 mechanism to  to provide technical  approach by scaling up the NAMA Livestock, the  MINAE
provide technical  support to livestock  implementation of efficient technologies, and  CORFOGA
support to the farms. farms technical support, among others. Livestock sector
*Avoid  lock-in:  o To implement the first scaling of the NAMA  Chamber of Milk 
•To prevent extensive  • 1 education campaign  Number of education  Livestock.  Producers
livestock farming  on organic agricultural  campaigns on the use  o To promote activities along the value chain  National Livestock 
9. Consolidation of a  9.1 To encourage  from competing with  waste for producers and  of OAWs that promote the implementation of efficient  Council
livestock model based  the livestock sector  areas for forest and  technicians. technology. Regional Commissions
on productive efficiency  to contribute to the  conservation.  Number of pilot  o To strengthen capacity building, extension  Academia
and reduction of  decarbonization using  To avoid feeding  • 1 pilot project on  schemes for the use of  work and technology transfer. Companies
greenhouse gases efficient practices  systems based on  the use of organic  OAWs in the industrial  o To increase the biodiversity of the farms. PITTA
and carbon capture in  grains importation,  agricultural waste in  sector and SMEs in the  o To develop a second-generation PES 
farms, the protection  which may increase  the industrial sector  food sector Environmental Services Payments model that 
of ecosystem services  the carbon footprint. and (Small and Medium  recognizes the service coming from good land 
and the generation of  Enterprise) SMEs in the  management in farms.
resilience. food sector. o To design and implement a mechanism to 
provide technical support to livestock farms, 
this mechanism must actively integrate 
information technologies.   (Quick Win)
9.1.3 To develop and scale-up the meat and milk 
value chains with a circular economy approach 
for the generation of biomass from organic 
agricultural waste (OWA). 
o To introduce experiences in the use of Organic 
Agricultural Waste (OWAs) in the livestock 
sector (in particular, excreta and slurry in the 
production of biogas and fertilizers). 
o To implement pilot plans for the use of 
OWAs for the industrial sector (meat and dairy 
industry) and SMEs in the food sector. 
99Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
Transparency,  A roadmap designed  Roadmap to consolidate 9.2.1. To enhance the calculation of the reduction 
metrics and open  to consolidate national  resources for national  generated with the measures and technologies 
data strategy  research on emission  emission factors  of emission mitigation and to develop national  MAG
- To unify the criteria  factors.  research emission factors.  MINAE
for the definition and o To promote the realization of the necessary  IMN
"forest" and studies to develop national emission factors for  DCC
 agroforestry livestock  1700 farms  A consolidated MRV  the livestock sector. 
agroforestry systems. implementing MRV.  system for the livestock  o To consolidate the MRV system of the 
sector in 2022 subsector and supply the SINAMECC and the 
D. Digitalization   (Quick Win) GHG Inventory, among other reports.  
and Economy-Based  o To implement the MRV system in the first 
Strategy: escalation of the NAMA Livestock. 
9. Consolidation of a  9.2 To design and  - Precision
livestock model based  improve the metric   agriculture.
on productive efficiency  system associated with 
and reduction of  the livestock production 
greenhouse gases units.
100Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
G. Transparency,  REDD+ strategy  Document with the  10.1.1. To promote the growth of forest cover and  FONAFIFO
metrics and open  completed and  Warsaw Framework and  the restoration of ecosystems. MAG
data strategy: financing initiated safeguards completed o To turn green and regenerate urban space  INDER
- To consolidate the  (example increase of recreational parks,  Indigenous sector 
National Monitoring  interurban corridors, river corridors). Private sector 
System of Land and  o To implement tree planting productive 
Ecosystem Cover and  At least 3 kilometres of  Intervened and  systems (fences, agroforestry systems, marine-
Use (SIMOCUTE) with  restored urban corridors improved urban area coastal zones in strategies and restoration 
SINIA and SINAMECC. actions).
o To stop deforestation.
B. Green Tax  o To strengthen the conservation of ecosystems 
Reform: inside and outside the protected areas.
- To identify new  o To regenerate degraded lands through forest 
sources to maintain the  restoration and reforestation.
PES system. o To accelerate actions to address forest fires.
10.  The management  10.1 To implement  Payment for Ecosystem  Officialized System  o To promote a landscape management with 
of the rural, urban  the REDD+ Strategy  C. Funding Strategy  Service System PES  Document a restoration approach in rural, coastal and 
and coastal territory  to encourage the  and Investment  2.0 designed and  urban areas.
will be oriented  reduction of emissions  Attraction for  officialized  o To design and launch new generation of 
towards conservation  from deforestation, to  transformation: Payments for Ecosystem Services PES to PES 
and sustainable use,  avoid degradation, and  - To establish access  2.0.
growing forest resources  to preserve forests and  strategy to climate  SIMOCUTE 1.0 in  Working operating  o To align the sale strategy of forest emission 
and ecosystem services  ecosystems in both rural  finance for the forest  operation and  system  reduction consistent with the NDC and 
based on nature-based  and urban areas. sector aligned with  integrated with  Decarbonization Plan.
solutions NDC targets. SINAMECC and SINIA
  10.1.2. To establish a sustainable management 
To avoid Lock-in of the forestry resources.
To avoid investments  o To promote the consumption of national 
that encourages an  wood from plantations and agroforestry 
expansive urban model  systems (See linkages with the line of action 
and destruction of  5). 
forest areas. o To open a space of dialogue to discuss the 
issue of exploitation of secondary forest.
o To consolidate the Forest Monitoring system 
and ecosystems.
o To establish a system of custody chain and 
traceability of wood.
o To improve data on emissions reduction 
accounting for m3 of wood consumed in the 
national territory.
101Decarbonization  Objective Linkages with  Period goal Indicator Activity Key actors
cross-cutting 
axis
strategy and lock in 
parameters
G. Transparency,  • At least 2 pilot projects  Project document and  10.2.1.  To strengthen carbon capture in other  MINAE
metrics and open  in management and  field activities  high carbon ecosystems MAG
data strategy: protection of wetlands  o To consolidate the program of wetland and  Academy
- To improve data and  and mangroves  Analysis document mangrove protection and management.  ONGS
related documents on  implemented. o To analyze strategies options associated with  Private sector
wetlands, peatlands,  blue carbon.
soils and other high  • Analysis of other high  o To promote information gathering (mapping, 
carbon ecosystems. carbon ecosystems  status, etc.) of other high carbon ecosystems 
- To make forest and  realized. (peat bogs, etc).
land use data and  en carbono generado o To promote soil management and restoration 
projections available in  processes.
open format.
To avoid Lock-in
10.2 To promote the  To avoid expansive 
protection, restoration  investments (real 
and management  estate, agricultural 
of other high carbon  activities) that lead 
ecosystems. to the destruction 
of forest areas, 
10. Se gestionará el  mangroves, wetlands
territorio rural, urbano 
y costero orientado 
a conservación 
y uso sostenible 
incrementando los 
recursos forestales y 
servicios ecosistémicos 
a partir de soluciones 
basadas en la naturaleza
102Créditos fotográficos:
Achivo de fotos de:
 PROCOMER
Florian Koop / GIZ
GIZ / Ann-Kathrin Schloenvoigt
ICAFE, Instituto del Café de Costa Rica
CORFOGA, Corporación Ganadera
Programa  de las Naciones Unidas para el Desarrollo (PNUD)
103m
o
c
a.
s
o
v
ati
e
cr
al
n
a
c
@
o
mill
a
ar
m.j
m / 
o
c
a.
s
o
v
ati
e
cr
al
n
a
c
@
el
o
ar
vill
p.
5 • 
7
A5
o S.5-1
v7
ati83
nal Cre9906 / 
Ca09-
or 61
strado p1-1942 /
u9
o e il6) 22
d0
a5
104 DiseñTels: (