Te hau mārohi ki anamata
Transitioning to a low-emissions 
and climate-resilient future 
AOTEAROA NEW ZEALAND’S LONG-TERM 
LOW-EMISSIONS DEVELOPMENT STRATEGYPublished in November 2021  
by the Ministry for the Environment  
Manatū Mō Te Taiao 
PO Box 10362, Wellington 6143, 
New Zealand
ISBN: 978-1-99-003393-3 
Publication number: ME 1607
© Crown copyright New Zealand 2021
This document is available on the 
Ministry for the Environment website: 
environment.govt.nzCONTENTS
A message from the Minister of Climate Change  4
Transitioning to a low-emissions  
and climate-resilient future  5
Emissions budgets and emissions reduction plans  11
Our current reality  16
Empower New Zealanders  24
Our long-term emissions reduction strategy  28
System settings  30
Sector plans  44
Equitable transition  60
Next steps  62
Glossary   63A message from  
the Minister of  
Climate Change
In Aotearoa New Zealand, tens of thousands  We are currently consulting on proposals  
have taken to our streets in climate strikes,  for the emissions reduction plan, which  
focusing attention on the climate crisis and  must be published by 31 May 2022. This  
demanding greater urgency. This is reflected  will set out how we will achieve the first 
across the political spectrum, with Parliament  emissions budget, while also alleviating  
unanimously passing the Zero Carbon Act   the impacts policies may have on employers 
in 2019. and employees, regions, iwi and Māori,  
and wider communities. It is critical  
The private sector is also mobilising, with 
that New Zealanders have a say in how  
companies individually and collectively 
we move to a low-emissions and climate-
committing to measuring and reporting their 
resilient future.
emissions, adopting emissions reduction 
targets and taking the temperature goals   In the meantime, this document – the first 
in the Paris Agreement seriously.  part of our emissions reduction plan – sets  
out our long-term vision, as well as how 
In its most recent report, the 
sectors and systems across the economy  
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
will contribute to this vision. It also describes  
warned that the world will exceed warming  
our national circumstances and sets the  
of 1.5°C and 2°C during the 21st century 
scene for the detailed policies and strategies 
unless there are deep cuts to greenhouse  
that follow in May 2022. 
gas emissions in the coming decades.1 
This is a critical step. It reiterates our 
This means immediate, rapid and large-
commitment to a low-emissions, climate-
scale action is needed to avoid a climate 
resilient future for Aotearoa New Zealand  
catastrophe. However, it also gives us an 
and to playing our part in the fight to stop  
opportunity to reshape our economy and 
the climate crisis. 
society, and reap significant environmental, 
economic and health co-benefits. 
Making the most of this opportunity requires 
a collective effort involving central and 
local government, iwi and hapū, as well as 
businesses, households, communities, and 
HON JAMES SHAW 
every sector of the economy. 
MINISTER OF CLIMATE CHANGE
1  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2021. Climate change 2021: The physical science basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. 2021.
4 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyTransitioning to  
a low-emissions  
and climate- 
resilient future Aotearoa New Zealand’s climate change mitigation strategy
Vision:
A productive, sustainable and inclusive economy
Purpose:
To contribute to the global eﬀ ort to limit warming to 1.5˚C above pre-industrial levels
Targets:
Net zero long-lived gases by 2050 and a 24–47% reduction in biogenic methane by 2050
Emissions budgets and emissions reduction plans
2046–50: Sixth emissions budget (set 2035) and emissions reduction plan (published 2044) Nationally 
3
Determined 
2041–45: Fifth emissions budget (set 2030) and emissions reduction plan (published 2039) Contribution
2036–40: Fourth emissions budget (set 2025) and emissions reduction plan (2034) Nationally 
2 Determined 
2031–35: Third emissions budget (set 2022) and emissions reduction plan (published 2029) Contribution
2026–30: Second emissions budget (set 2022) and emissions reduction plan (published 2024) Nationally 
1
Determined 
2022–25: First emissions budget (set 2022) and emissions reduction plan (published 2022) Contribution
Our long-term emissions reduction strategy
System settings Sector plans Equitable transition
Government accountability  Transport Māori
and coordination
Energy and industry Regional communities
Funding and fi nance
Building and construction Skills and education
Emissions pricing
Waste and F-gases Workers
Behaviour change
Agriculture Population groups
Planning and infrastructure
Forestry and 
Research, science, technology  nature-based solutions
and innovation
International cooperation
Circular economy 
and bioeconomy
Empower New Zealanders
Māori Central government Local government Private sector Civil society
Our current reality
Gross emissions: 82.3 Mt CO-e Net emissions: 54.9 Mt CO-e Change since 1990: + 26%
2 2Aotearoa New Zealand’s climate change mitigation strategy
Vision:
Climate change is the greatest challenge of our time.  
A productive, sustainable and inclusive economy
The impacts are already being felt in Aotearoa 
Purpose:
To contribute to the global eﬀ ort to limit warming to 1.5˚C above pre-industrial levels New Zealand, in the Pacific and around the world. 
Targets: Avoiding worse effects means urgently reducing 
Net zero long-lived gases by 2050 and a 24–47% reduction in biogenic methane by 2050
greenhouse gas emissions and limiting global average 
temperature rise to 1.5˚C above pre-industrial levels.  
Emissions budgets and emissions reduction plans We also need to adapt to the impacts that are already 
locked in.
2046–50: Sixth emissions budget (set 2035) and emissions reduction plan (published 2044) Nationally 
3
Determined 
2041–45: Fifth emissions budget (set 2030) and emissions reduction plan (published 2039) Contribution The future wellbeing, security and prosperity of 
New Zealanders depends on climate action. Aotearoa  
2036–40: Fourth emissions budget (set 2025) and emissions reduction plan (2034) Nationally 
2 Determined 
2031–35: Third emissions budget (set 2022) and emissions reduction plan (published 2029) Contribution will play its part by contributing to the global fight 
against climate change, standing with the Pacific and 
2026–30: Second emissions budget (set 2022) and emissions reduction plan (published 2024) Nationally 
1
Determined 
2022–25: First emissions budget (set 2022) and emissions reduction plan (published 2022) Contribution building a low-emissions and climate-resilient future.
Our long-term emissions reduction strategy
System settings Sector plans Equitable transition
Government accountability  Transport Māori
and coordination
Energy and industry Regional communities
Funding and fi nance
Building and construction Skills and education
Emissions pricing
Waste and F-gases Workers
Behaviour change
Agriculture Population groups
Planning and infrastructure
Forestry and 
Research, science, technology  nature-based solutions
and innovation
International cooperation
Circular economy 
and bioeconomy
Empower New Zealanders
Māori Central government Local government Private sector Civil society
Our current reality
Gross emissions: 82.3 Mt CO-e Net emissions: 54.9 Mt CO-e Change since 1990: + 26%
2 2
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 7Vision 
The vision for Aotearoa New Zealand is   ►  transitioning in a way that enhances 
to build thriving, sustainable communities   New Zealanders’ wellbeing and creates 
that are good for people and that function  jobs, new industries, sustainable business 
within the limits of our planet. We envisage   models, resilient communities and a  
a productive, sustainable and inclusive  healthy environment 
economy where:
►  building people’s skills to drive and adapt 
►  economic activity is nature-enhancing,  to the transition
carbon neutral, circular and climate resilient
►  partnering with Māori and honouring the 
►  energy and transport systems are  Government’s obligations under Te Tiriti.
accessible, affordable and sustainable
The Government is putting in place an 
►  production systems are regenerative, 
ambitious programme of investment in 
providing a way for Aotearoa to innovate 
actions to accelerate our transition. These 
and invest to meet future challenges
will move Aotearoa away from fossil fuels; 
►  every household can meet its material  increase investment in energy efficiency, 
needs, in turn reducing child poverty renewable energy and bioresources; and 
reduce agricultural emissions through 
►  partners under Te Tiriti o Waitangi (Te 
emissions pricing and emerging technologies 
Tiriti)2 work together to realise mutually 
and practices. There is also scope for greater 
beneficial economic opportunities and  
investment in forestry. 
their obligations as kaitiaki (guardians).
This journey will be challenging. All 
We have the chance to use the unique 
New Zealanders must play their part and 
strengths of Aotearoa to turn global climate 
work together in innovative ways to reduce 
challenges into economic solutions. 
emissions and set the economy up for  
We can transform the economy to be  success in a low-emissions world. 
more productive, innovative, circular and 
There are also significant co-benefits: new 
sustainable. 
jobs, new markets and opportunities for Kiwi 
Our aim is to be globally competitive in   businesses, a more renewable energy system, 
a net-zero emissions world and to create a  a more sustainable agriculture sector, less air 
better future for this generation and those   pollution, warmer and drier homes, improved 
to come.  public health, new technologies, protection of 
native species and ecosystems, cost savings 
Achieving this future means:
for businesses, and overall resilience.
►  making significant and urgent cuts in our 
greenhouse gas emissions and expanding 
our carbon sinks, so that we achieve our 
2050 targets and contribute to global 
efforts to limit warming to 1.5°C above 
pre-industrial levels
2  Te Tiriti o Waitangi (the Treaty of Waitangi) is an agreement between the British Crown and around 540 Māori rangatira (chiefs), which was first 
signed on 6 February 1840. It is regarded as Aotearoa New Zealand’s founding document and has led to the development of principles that form the 
basis of Crown–Māori relationships today. These principles include partnership, active protection of Māori interests and participation.
8 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyPurpose 
Our main purpose is to urgently reduce  In doing so, we will also contribute to global 
greenhouse gas emissions and increase   efforts to limit temperature rise to 1.5°C.
carbon sinks, so that we meet our domestic 
emissions reduction targets. 
WHY WE NEED TO LIMIT TEMPERATURE RISE TO 1.5°C
It is critical that the world limits warming to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. Any additional warming 
will increase the impacts of climate change. 
Any warming over 1.5°C will increase the severity and frequency of extreme heat events, the intensity 
of rainfall and the risk of drought. As flooding, water scarcity and extreme weather events worsen, they 
will affect industries and the economy.
Compared with 2°C, limiting warming to 1.5°C is projected to protect up to 10 million people from 
risks associated with sea-level rise. Limiting warming to 1.5°C could reduce the proportion of the world 
population exposed to water stress induced by climate change by up to 50 per cent.3
Limiting temperature rise to 1.5°C is expected to make it easier for ecosystems, food and health systems 
to adapt, and estimated costs of adaptation may be lower.
Limiting warming means reducing anthropogenic (produced by humans) emissions of carbon dioxide 
(CO ) to net zero. Under the 1.5°C limit, net-zero CO  probably needs to be achieved by around 2050. 
2 2
Emissions of non-CO  gases, like methane and nitrous oxide, also require deep reductions, though not 
2
necessarily to zero. Long-term, net negative emissions and additional reductions in non-CO  emissions 
2
may be needed to prevent further temperature increases and minimise sea-level rise.
As part of its sixth assessment report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change recently 
released a new report, Climate Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis. This provides new estimates 
of the chances of crossing the global warming level of 1.5°C in the next decades. It finds that, unless 
there are immediate, rapid and large-scale reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, the 1.5°C and 2°C 
temperature goals in the Paris Agreement will be beyond reach.3
3  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. 2021. Climate change 2021: The physical science basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Sixth 
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press. 2021. 
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 9Targets
In 2019, Aotearoa legislated a series of  This approach reflects the different warming 
emissions reduction targets for the first time.  effects that greenhouse gases have on 
the atmosphere. It also acknowledges 
The Climate Change Response Act 2002 
the emissions profile of Aotearoa and will 
requires that all greenhouse gases, other than 
effectively drive change across the economy.
biogenic methane, reach net zero by 2050. 
Separate targets for biogenic methane 
emissions require a 10 per cent reduction  
by 2030 and a 24–47 per cent reduction by 
2050 (compared with 2017 levels). 
BIOGENIC METHANE EMISSIONS IN AOTEAROA
The high level of agricultural production in Aotearoa means we produce a lot of methane and nitrous 
oxide. These have a greater warming effect than carbon dioxide.
Nearly half (48 per cent) of our gross emissions come from the agriculture sector. Most of these 
emissions are biogenic methane, with the sector contributing around 91 per cent of our total biogenic 
methane in 2019 (the remaining 9 per cent came from the waste sector). Typically, agriculture 
constitutes only a small proportion of gross emissions in other countries.
10 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyEmissions budgets 
and emissions 
reduction plansEmissions budgets 
Emissions budgets set the pace of our transition. They 
specify the amount of greenhouse gas emissions that are 
permitted over a five-year period or, in the case of the 
first emissions budget, over four years. The emissions 
budgets act as interim targets that step towards the  
2050 target. 
Emissions budgets focus on reducing emissions  On 31 May 2021, the Climate Change 
in Aotearoa. For this reason, they must be met  Commission advised the Government on  
– as far as possible – through domestic action  the first three emissions budgets (2022–2025, 
to reduce emissions and increase removals, for  2026–2030, 2031–2035). The Government 
example, through forestry.  must set the first three emissions budgets  
by 31 May 2022. 
The use of offshore mitigation to achieve the 
emissions budgets is strictly limited.
Figure 1. Relationship between emissions budgets and Nationally Determined Contributions 
Emissions budget 1* Projected greenhouse
(1 Jan 2022–31 Dec 2025)
gas emissions (net)
s Emissions budget 2*
on (1 Jan 2026–31 Dec 2030)
si
s
mi
e
s  Emissions budget 3*
a
g (1 Jan 2031–31 Dec 2035)
e 
s
u
o
h
n
e
e Nationally Determined Contribution
r
t g (1 Jan 2021–31 Dec 2030)
e
N
2020 2025 2030 2035
Year
*The Government will make ﬁnal decisions on the ﬁrst three emission budgets by 31 May 2022
12 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS
Aotearoa is committed to the Paris Agreement and will set progressively ambitious Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs). An NDC is a commitment to reduce global emissions over a given 
period. Each NDC must represent our highest possible ambition for contributing to efforts to reduce 
global emissions.
Aotearoa recently updated its NDC, committing to reduce net emissions to 50 per cent below gross 
2005 levels by 2030. This corresponds to a 41 per cent reduction using a multi-year emissions budget 
starting from the 2020 emissions target. The update to the NDC followed advice from the Climate 
Change Commission in May 2021.
Our NDC is our contribution to reducing global emissions, and this can be met through a combination  
of domestic emissions reductions, removals from forestry within Aotearoa, and international cooperation 
to access offshore mitigation with environmental integrity under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement.
In comparison, reducing domestic emissions and transitioning our economy are the focus of the 
domestic 2050 target, emissions budgets and emissions reduction plans. As noted above, these must  
be achieved by taking action at home. 
In using international cooperation (such as international carbon markets) to drive mitigation action 
offshore for the purposes of meeting our NDC, Aotearoa is committed to ensuring environmental 
integrity, robust accounting and transparency, and supporting sustainable development. See further 
details on our approach to carbon market cooperation.
Figure 2. Pillars of the Paris Agreement and Zero Carbon Framework
Paris Agreement Zero Carbon Framework
An international agreement for the global response  A domestic framework for reducing our emissions
to climate change 
Goals: Goals:
Hold global average temperature rise to 2°C above pre-industrial levels and  Contribute to eff orts to limit global average temperature rise to 1.5°C 
pursue eff orts to limit temperature rise to 1.5°C
Transiti on Aotearoa to a low-emissions and climate-resilient economy
Net zero emissions in the second half of the century
By 2050, long-lived greenhouse gases are net zero and biogenic methane 
Increase resilience and make global fi nancial fl ows consistent  emissions are 24–47% below 2017 levels, and 10% below by 2030
with low-emissions and climate-resilient development
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDC) towards 
Emissions budgets focus on cutting domestic 
the global eﬀ ort
emissions
Countries must communicate their contributi ons to the global response to 
Aim to meet our domesti c and internati onal commitments
climate change 
To be met through domesti c emissions reducti ons and removals; access to 
New Zealand’s fi rst NDC covers 2021–2030
internati onal markets is strictly limited
Contributi ons can be achieved through both domesti c acti on (emissions 
Domesti c abatement will count towards meeti ng our NDC
reducti ons and removals) and internati onal cooperati on (off shore miti gati on)
Emissions reductions plans provide the detail
Long-term low-emissions development strategy
Detailed policies and strategies that focus on the next 5–15 years
High-level nati onal strategies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to be 
communicated under the Paris Agreement The fi rst plan published at the end of 2021 with a new plan published 
every fi ve years from 2024
Supplements the long-term low-emissions development strategy
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 13Emissions reduction plans 
Emissions reduction plans are one of the main  By 31 May 2022, the Government  
requirements in the Zero Carbon Framework  will publish:
(figure 3). This was introduced through 
►  the first three budgets (2022–25,  
amendments to our primary piece of climate 
2026–30 and 2031–35) 
change legislation, the Climate Change 
►  the first emissions reduction plan. 
Response Act 2002. Among other things, 
these amendments:
►  referenced the 1.5°C temperature goal in 
our climate change legislation
►  legislated domestic targets for 2050, which 
require biogenic methane emissions to 
reduce by 24–47 per cent and all other 
gases to reach net zero4
►  set up a framework of emissions budgets 
and emissions reduction plans to manage 
the transition between now and 2050.
Figure 3. Zero Carbon Framework
Emissions reduction  Emissions budgets  Emissions reduction plans Adaptation measures 
targets
Interim targets that step  The policies and strategies to  Strategies to help us 
By 2050:  towards 2050 achieve the emissions budgets understand and respond 
to climate change risks
Long-lived greenhouse gas 
emissions are net zero
Biogenic methane emissions 
are 24–47% below 2017 levels 
The Climate Change Commission provides independent, expert advice to the Government by:
Reviewing New Zealand’s  Undertaking Nati onal Climate 
Advising on the policy 
emissions targets every fi ve  Recommending emissions  Change Risk Assessments, and 
directi on of the emissions 
years or at the request of  budgets every fi ve years reviewing and monitoring the 
reducti on plans
the Minister Nati onal Adaptati on Plan
4  These targets were informed by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s special report on the impacts of global warming at 1.5°C.
14 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyThis document is Part I of the 
first emissions reduction plan 
The emissions reduction plan will detail how  The second stage involves publishing the 
Aotearoa will meet its first emissions budget,  full emissions reduction plan in May 2022, 
and put the country on a path to meet future  following public consultation in October–
emissions budgets and the 2050 target.  November 2021 and final decisions. This will 
include detailed policies and strategies for: 
The plan also serves as our long-term low-
emissions development strategy for the  ►  making an equitable transition, including 
purposes of the Paris Agreement,5 and will   through a fair distribution of costs and 
be published in two stages (figure 4).  benefits, strong partnerships, and ensuring 
iwi, Māori, businesses and communities 
Part I is the first stage. This sets out the 
have a leading role 
current reality in Aotearoa, how the emissions 
reduction plan fits into the country's wider  ►  aligning system settings across sectors to 
climate response, and the long-term strategy  enable a streamlined transition throughout 
for each sector and system covered by   the country 
the plan. ►  reducing emissions in the key sectors of  
the economy, increasing removals in the 
first emissions budget period and setting  
us up for success in the long term.
Figure 4. Development of the emissions reduction plan
February–  The Climate Change Commission consulted on recommendations for the first three 
March 2021 emissions budgets and the direction of policy for the emissions reduction plan
31 May 2021 The Government received the Commission’s final advice 
August 2021 The Government made in-principle decisions on the levels of the first three 
emissions budgets
October–  Government consultation on new proposals for the first emissions reduction 
November 2021 plan (The final plan may include other policies and strategies that are subject to 
separate consultation.)
November 2021 Publish the first part of the emissions reduction plan
31 May 2022 Publish the first three emissions budgets in the New Zealand Gazette. 
Publish the full emissions reduction plan
5  Paris Agreement, Article 4, paragraph 19.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 15Our current realityNational 
circumstances
Aotearoa New Zealand and our place 
in the Pacific
•  Aotearoa lies in the South Paciﬁc and is part of the 
Realm of New Zealand (along with the Cook Islands, 
Niue, Tokelau and the Ross Dependency).
•  Tokelau is a territory of Aotearoa. Our ratiﬁcation of 
the Paris Agreement was extended to Tokelau in 2017, 
and Tokelau’s emissions are included in the New Zealand 
Greenhouse Gas Inventory.
Government Te Tiriti o Waitangi
•  Aotearoa has an unwritten constitution and is a  •  Māori are tangata whenua, the indigenous people 
constitutional monarchy. Queen Elizabeth II is  of Aotearoa.
our Head of State. 
•  Te Tiriti o Waitangi (the Treaty of Waitangi) is our 
•  Executive central government is formed from a  founding document and the source of principles that 
democratically elected House of Representatives. govern Crown–Māori relationships.
•  Parliament consists of the House of Representatives  •  These principles include partnership, participation and 
and the Sovereign. Its principal functions are to enact  the active protection of Māori knowledge, interests, 
laws and hold the Government to account. values and other taonga. 
•  Local government has devolved responsibility for local  •  The principles of Te Tiriti mean that partnership is a 
planning and resource management. fundamental part of our transition to a low-emissions, 
climate-resilient economy.
Geography
•   Aotearoa is long, narrow and mountainous, with a 
combined land area of around 27 million hectares 
and 17,200 kilometres of coastline.
•  We have one of the largest exclusive economic zones 
(EEZs) in the world. 
•  Grassland for agriculture, natural forest and plantation 
forestry form our main land cover.
•  One-third of our land area (mainly natural forest) is 
protected for conservation purposes.
Our population
•   Aotearoa has a population of 5.1 million people 
(March 2021).
•  Our population has increased from 3.5 million in 1991 
and could reach 6 million by 2050. This is largely driven 
by net migration to Aotearoa.
•  The population is widely distributed, which contributes 
to emissions due to the need for transport (dominated 
by private petrol and diesel vehicles).National 
Economy
circumstances •  In the year ended March 2021, our nominal gross domestic product (GDP) was NZ$325 billion (US$226.9 billion).  
Since 1990, our average annual economic growth rate has been 2.6 per cent.
•  Our economy is based on services (about two-thirds of GDP) and the manufacturing and primary sectors.
•  The primary sector (agricultural, horticultural, forestry, mining and ﬁshing industries) directly accounts for around 
Aotearoa New Zealand and our place 
8 per cent of GDP and contributes just over half of total export earnings. It is also an important employer.
in the Pacific
•  Before the COVID-19 pandemic, international tourism was an important source of income, directly contributing 
•  Aotearoa lies in the South Paciﬁc and is part of the  5.8 per cent of GDP in 2019.
Realm of New Zealand (along with the Cook Islands, 
•  Trade is critical. From 2008 to 2018, international trade made up 60 per cent of all economic activity.
Niue, Tokelau and the Ross Dependency).
•  Tokelau is a territory of Aotearoa. Our ratiﬁcation of 
the Paris Agreement was extended to Tokelau in 2017, 
and Tokelau’s emissions are included in the New Zealand 
Greenhouse Gas Inventory.
Emissions profile Emissions trends
•  Our emissions proﬁle is shaped by the size  •  In 2019, gross greenhouse gas emissions were 
of the land sector (agriculture and forestry)  82.3 Mt CO -e and net emissions were 54.9 Mt CO -e. 
2 2
relative to the population.
•  Gross emissions have grown 26 per cent since 1990.
Government Te Tiriti o Waitangi
•  Our largest sources and sinks of emissions 
•  Energy and agriculture emissions have grown between 
•  Aotearoa has an unwritten constitution and is a  •  Māori are tangata whenua, the indigenous people  are in the land sector: 1990 and 2019. 
constitutional monarchy. Queen Elizabeth II is  of Aotearoa. —  in 2019, almost half of gross emissions 
—  Energy sector emissions have increased by 44.3 per 
our Head of State.  •  Te Tiriti o Waitangi (the Treaty of Waitangi) is our  were methane and nitrous oxide from  cent, mainly due to increased use of fossil fuels in road 
•  Executive central government is formed from a  founding document and the source of principles that  livestock farming transport, and in manufacturing and construction. 
democratically elected House of Representatives. govern Crown–Māori relationships. —  in 2019, land use, land-use change and the 
—  Agriculture sector emissions have increased by 
•  Parliament consists of the House of Representatives  •  These principles include partnership, participation and  forestry sector were responsible for net  17.1 per cent, mainly due to an 82 per cent rise in the 
and the Sovereign. Its principal functions are to enact  the active protection of Māori knowledge, interests,  removals of 27.4 metric tonnes carbon  size of the national dairy herd and a 662.7 per cent 
laws and hold the Government to account. values and other taonga.  dioxide equivalent (Mt CO2-e) and oﬀset  rise in the use of synthetic nitrogen fertiliser since 
33 per cent of gross emissions.
•  Local government has devolved responsibility for local  •  The principles of Te Tiriti mean that partnership is a  1990. This increase has been partially oﬀset by a 
planning and resource management. fundamental part of our transition to a low-emissions,  •  Energy1 is the second largest source of  decrease in the populations of sheep, beef cattle and 
climate-resilient economy. emissions, contributing 42 per cent of gross  deer by 53.6 per cent, 15.3 per cent and 17.0 per cent 
emissions in 2019. Energy emissions are  respectively since 1990. The overall rise has also 
dominated by transport, manufacturing  occurred despite successful eﬀorts to reduce the 
industries and the production of heat and  emissions intensity of livestock on farms.
electricity.
•  While emissions have grown since 1990, they have been 
largely unchanged since 2003. This shows that emissions 
1    In the emissions reduction plan, transport emissions are separate 
Geography from stationary energy and industrial process emissions. eﬃciency has been increasing and we seek to accelerate 
this trend.
•   Aotearoa is long, narrow and mountainous, with a 
combined land area of around 27 million hectares 
and 17,200 kilometres of coastline.
•  We have one of the largest exclusive economic zones  Synthe(cid:2462)(cid:49)(cid:2)
(EEZs) in the world.  greenhouse  Carbon dioxide  Methane  Nitrous oxide
gases 2% (CO ) 46% (CH ) 42% (N O) 10%
•  Grassland for agriculture, natural forest and plantation  2 4 2
forestry form our main land cover.
•  One-third of our land area (mainly natural forest) is 
protected for conservation purposes.
Our population
•   Aotearoa has a population of 5.1 million people 
Energy 42%
(March 2021).
•  Our population has increased from 3.5 million in 1991 
and could reach 6 million by 2050. This is largely driven 
by net migration to Aotearoa.
•  The population is widely distributed, which contributes 
tboy  epmrivisastieo npse tdruoel  atnod t hdeie nseeel vde fhoirc lteras)n.sport (dominated  Industrial Processes 6%and Product Use  20% Transport 17% Other energy  5%Electricity 4% Waste 48% AgricultureOur climate change response 
Climate change is a global problem that  ►  align financial flows and decision-making 
requires a global solution. Aotearoa is  with the pathway towards low emissions 
committed to doing its part and strengthening  and climate resilience. We do this through 
that global response. We do this by taking  international climate finance, pricing 
action domestically, in our region and globally.  emissions, removing environmentally 
We aim to:  harmful subsidies (and pushing for others 
to do the same) and requiring climate-
►  play our part in limiting global temperature 
related financial disclosures.
rise to 1.5°C. We take on and meet 
ambitious emissions reduction targets that 
The following three pages set out our climate 
are grounded in science; take steps towards 
change response and the role of the plan. 
a low-emissions economy; contribute to 
an effective multilateral climate response; 
provide climate finance and support; 
and contribute to international efforts to 
reduce emissions
►  adapt and build resilience to the adverse 
impacts of climate change. We work  
to understand and adapt to the climate 
risks facing Aotearoa; we support  
others, particularly Pacific Island countries 
– recognising that climate change is  
the single greatest threat to livelihoods, 
security and wellbeing in the Pacific region
20 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyAt home
Mitigation
Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) Emissions budgets
Our commitment to reduce global emissions between  Interim targets that limit the amount of domestic 
2021 and 2030. Aotearoa recently updated its NDC to  emissions permitted over a ﬁve-year period.
reduce net greenhouse gas emissions to 50 per cent 
Emissions reduction plans
below gross 2005 levels by 2030. This corresponds to 
Policies and strategies for meeting emissions budgets 
a 41 per cent reduction using a multi-year emissions 
and managing the impacts of the transition.
budget starting from our 2020 target. 
See New Zealand's NDC. Emissions pricing
Emissions are priced through the New Zealand 
Legislated domestic emissions reduction target
Emissions Trading Scheme and the Synthetic 
Our commitment to reduce domestic emissions (within 
Greenhouse Gas Levy. The He Waka Eke Noa – Primary 
New Zealand). The 2050 targets are: reduce biogenic 
Sector Climate Action Partnership is working to price 
methane emissions by 10 per cent by 2030, and by 
agricultural emissions from 2025.
24–47 per cent by 2050 (relative to 2017 levels); 
reduce emissions of all other gases to net zero by 2050. 
Adaptation
National climate change risk assessment Information and reporting
A mandatory six-yearly assessment of the risks  The Minister of Climate Change or the Climate 
Aotearoa faces from climate change. It covers  Change Commission may request certain 
the natural environment, built environment, human,  organisations to provide information, including the 
economic and governance domains. Read more. risks faced and how they are managing these. 
National adaptation plan Climate Change Adaptation Act
Required every six years, this sets out what we must  We are developing legislation to address managed 
do to respond to the risks identiﬁed in the most recent  retreat and the funding and ﬁnancing of adaptation. 
national climate change risk assessment.  Read more.
Enablers
Climate Change Response Act 2002 Data and evidence
Our primary legal framework for climate action in  We regularly report on emissions and removals, 
Aotearoa, which includes: including through the New Zealand Greenhouse Gas 
• the ‘Zero Carbon Framework’ to manage  Inventory, environmental reporting, biennial reports 
our transition to a low-emissions and climate- and national communications.
resilient future Aligning ﬁnancial ﬂows with low emissions and 
• independent expert advice and monitoring of  climate resilience 
progress (via the Climate Change Commission) We are doing this by pricing emissions, removing 
environmentally harmful subsidies, requiring 
• emissions pricing via the New Zealand Emissions 
climate-related ﬁnancial disclosures, funding 
Trading Scheme and Synthetic Greenhouse 
low-emissions alternatives and research and 
Gas Levy
development, and through our sovereign wealth 
• international climate change obligations including 
fund practices.
the legal framework to collect information and 
report on our domestic greenhouse gas emissions.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 21In the Pacific
Standing with the Pacific
Ambition Regional action
We recognise the importance for the region of limiting  Aotearoa and other Paciﬁc Islands Forum members 
temperature rise to 1.5°C. We have placed this at  have aﬃrmed that “climate change is the single 
the heart of our climate change response, and we  greatest threat to the livelihoods, security and 
are working to inﬂuence others to align their actions  wellbeing of the peoples of the Paciﬁc” in the Boe 
with 1.5°C.  Declaration and the Kainaki II Declaration. We will 
continue to pursue bold and innovative regional 
Sea-level rise and maritime zones
solutions to climate change.
This year, Paciﬁc Islands Forum leaders issued the 
Declaration on Preserving Maritime Zones in the Face  Amplifying Paciﬁc voices
of Climate Change-Related Sea-Level-Rise. This  As a Paciﬁc country, Aotearoa will continue 
landmark declaration sets out our collective intention  to support and amplify the voice of Paciﬁc Island 
to maintain our maritime zones in the face of sea- countries in global climate change processes.
level rise. It continues the region’s proud record of 
leadership on oceans issues, while upholding the 
integrity of the United Nations Convention on the 
Law of the Sea.
Climate-related support
Aotearoa has increased its international climate  Support for adaptation
ﬁnance commitment to $1.3 billion for 2022–2025.  A major focus is support for adaptation in the Paciﬁc. 
At least 50 per cent of this ﬁnance will be delivered  Of our overall climate ﬁnance, at least 50 per cent will 
in the Paciﬁc.  be used for adaptation although in the Paciﬁc this 
proportion will likely be much higher given the priority 
This is a considerable change in scale in our 
the Paciﬁc places on adaptation and resilience. 
climate ﬁnance commitments, and underlines the 
importance we are placing on global eﬀorts for  This support helps developing countries take practical 
climate change action. action, including improving water and food security, 
protecting the oceans, strengthening ecosystems and 
Partner-led approach
improving access to climate science to support 
Our approach to climate-related support is based on 
decision making.
partner countries' national plans and identiﬁed needs. 
We support capacity building targeted to activities, 
such as agriculture development, renewable 
electricity generation and building resilience to 
disaster risk.
22 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyIn the world
Multilateral response
Paris Agreement Maritime and aviation emissions
Aotearoa is committed to the global implementation  We are pushing for action to align international 
of the Paris Agreement, and eﬀective and ambitious  maritime and aviation emissions with limiting 
global action. We champion environmental integrity  temperature rise to 1.5°C. This includes taking part 
and ambition in the rules for implementing the  in the International Maritime Organization and 
agreement, and the mechanisms that will allow  International Civil Aviation Organization negotiations 
scrutiny and give conﬁdence in Parties’ actions.  on reducing greenhouse gas emissions from 
Read more. these sectors.
Cooperation
Developing solutions and sharing best practice International carbon markets
We champion international research on measuring  We advocate for international carbon markets with 
and reducing agricultural emissions, by jointly  high environmental integrity via plurilateral processes 
establishing the Global Research Alliance on  (eg, the Ministerial Declaration on Carbon Markets 
Agricultural Greenhouse Gases. and Asia–Paciﬁc Carbon Markets Roundtable) and 
working bilaterally (eg, the Florence Process, 
Innovative approaches
International Carbon Action Partnership).
We co-launched the Agreement on Climate Change, 
Trade and Sustainability. This brings together some  Trade for All 
of the inter-related elements of the climate change,  Trade for All will help ensure that our trade policy 
trade and sustainable development agendas. delivers for all New Zealanders and contributes to 
addressing issues such as climate change.
Advocacy and support
Climate-related support Fossil fuel subsidy reform
A signiﬁcant amount of our $1.3 billion climate  We are a leading advocate for the reform of 
ﬁnance commitment will be spent outside the Paciﬁc  environmentally harmful subsidies such as for fossil 
and include support for mitigation and adaptation  fuel. We progress this through an informal “Friends” 
initiatives. group and the World Trade Organization (WTO), 
Asia-Paciﬁc Economic Cooperation (APEC), United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC) and the Organisation for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD).
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 23Empower  
New Zealanders
The success of our transition relies on  
many groups taking leading roles, including  
central and local government, iwi and  
Māori, local government, the private  
sector and civil society.Māori Central government 
Māori have an important leadership role in   The Government must coordinate efforts to 
the transition to a low-emissions and climate- address climate change by factoring it into 
resilient future.  decision-making and leading by example.  
A number of governance arrangements and 
Māori are tangata whenua (the people of 
tools already support this shift.
the land) and the partner of local and central 
government. Te Tiriti obliges the Government 
GOVERNANCE 
and Māori to make decisions together 
The transition requires shifts across the 
about our pathway in a way that balances 
economy and actions that span several 
kāwanatanga (the right for the Government 
ministerial portfolios. 
to govern) with rangatiratanga (the right for 
Māori to make decisions for Māori). For greater coordination, the Climate 
Response Ministerial Group was established 
Māori have diverse perspectives as whānau, 
in 2020. It is chaired by the Prime Minister 
hapū and iwi, land owners, workers, educators 
and made up of Ministers who hold portfolios 
and community members. Māori businesses 
relevant to climate change. 
and investors are also significant contributors 
to the economy.  The Climate Response Ministerial Group 
meets regularly to discuss the climate change 
Climate change – and our transition – will 
work programme and give direction on key 
have different and intersecting impacts for 
areas, including reducing emissions and 
these groups. A number of iwi, hapū and 
adapting to climate change. 
Māori organisations are building resilience  
and reducing emissions, and the importance 
ADMINISTERING CLIMATE POLICY 
of this leadership will only increase. 
The Ministry for the Environment is the 
We must all support these efforts and   Government’s primary advisor on climate 
work with Māori to achieve a fair and   change, the environment and international 
inclusive transition.  matters affecting the environment. It also 
administers the Climate Change Response  
Māori have been at the forefront of the call 
Act 2002.
for sustainable management and care for the 
natural world, as expressed in the ethic of  Although the Ministry for the Environment 
kaitiakitanga (guardianship). It is important to  leads climate change policy, the response 
recognise the value of te ao Māori (the Māori  to climate change involves efforts across 
world view) and mātauranga Māori (traditional  Aotearoa. Other government agencies 
knowledge) to the climate change response.  contribute policy over a range of sectors,  
and other actors in the economy implement 
Te ao Māori focuses on maintaining the 
policy. 
balance between the physical and spiritual 
worlds. It recognises anthropogenic global 
warming and biodiversity loss as reflecting 
practices that are incorrect, irrational and 
unsustainable. Te ao Māori and our obligation 
under Te Tiriti to protect Māori culture  
and people underscore the urgent need to 
make changes. 
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 25Since 2019, the Government has driven   The aim is to make a number of public 
a whole-of-economy climate change work  organisations carbon neutral from 2025. 
programme through the Climate Change  CNGP participants should: 
Chief Executives Board. This brings together 
►  measure, verify and report on their 
chief executives from the Ministry for the 
emissions annually
Environment, the Treasury, the Ministry 
►  set gross emissions reduction targets  
of Transport, the Ministry of Business, 
and longer-term reduction plans
Innovation and Employment, the Ministry  
for Primary Industries, the Energy Efficiency  ►  introduce a plan to reduce their 
and Conservation Authority and the Ministry  organisation’s emissions
of Foreign Affairs and Trade.  ►  offset remaining gross emissions  
from 2025.
INFORMING POLICY DECISIONS
Since 1 November 2019, government agencies  Local government
have been required to undertake (and report 
Local authorities (city, regional, district and 
on) a greenhouse gas emissions analysis for all 
unitary councils) are at the forefront of  
policy proposals that go to Cabinet and meet 
dealing with the impacts of climate change. 
certain criteria. This analysis, called a ‘Climate 
Implications of Policy Assessment’, must  Local authorities have a decision-making  
include an estimate of the emissions impacts  role in the use and management of our natural 
for Aotearoa if the proposal is brought in.  resources, exercised through planning and 
These assessments inform Cabinet’s policy  permits. For most people, local authorities  
decisions and align them with the emissions  are the main government interface. They 
reduction targets included in the Climate  have an important role in providing public 
Change Response Act 2002. education and building support for climate 
change policy.
LEADING BY EXAMPLE
A number of councils are already addressing 
In 2020, the Carbon Neutral Government 
the impacts of climate change and the need to 
Programme (CNGP) was set up to accelerate 
reduce emissions. Some are working together 
the reduction of emissions in the public 
on initiatives to support the transition.  
sector. The Government will join businesses 
These initiatives include strategic planning, 
and communities that are leading the way.
providing infrastructure and services, and 
managing growth. 
Regional councils are increasingly providing 
climate data and models that show 
climate change impacts at a local level. 
The Government is working to ensure that 
national policies are in place to help guide 
local government action.
26 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyPrivate sector Civil society 
There is significant support from the private  Individuals and non-governmental 
sector for the shift to a low-emissions  organisations will continue to play an 
economy. Organisations are increasingly  important role in the transition. 
taking meaningful action to reduce  
It is vital that we provide ongoing, meaningful 
their emissions. 
opportunities for members of the public to 
Organisations such as the Climate Leaders  have their say. 
Coalition and Sustainable Business Council  
Consultation on proposals for the emissions 
are also making strides. 
reduction plan between 13 October and 
The Climate Leaders Coalition is a CEO-led  24 November 2021 will also inform final 
organisation launched in July 2018 with 60  government decisions on emissions budgets. 
signatories. It promotes business leadership  The Government will continue to consult 
and collective action on climate change. Now  on new policies and measures that seek to 
with over 100 signatories, it accounts for  reduce emissions and increase our carbon 
almost 60 per cent of our gross emissions   sinks. 
and around 38 per cent of GDP, and employs 
Non-governmental organisations will also 
over 200,000 people. 
have a role in raising awareness of climate 
Signatories commit to measuring and publicly  change, mobilising action and holding the 
reporting their emissions, setting a public  Government to account for progress. One 
emissions reduction target, in line with the  notable example is Generation Zero, a youth-
temperature goals of the Paris Agreement,  led organisation that was instrumental in 
disclosing climate risk and working with their  delivering the Climate Change Response  
employees and suppliers to reduce emissions.  (Zero Carbon) Amendment Act 2019.
The Sustainable Business Council is a 
membership organisation with over 115 
businesses from all sectors, ambitious for a 
sustainable Aotearoa. Members represent 
more than $111 billion of collective turnover, 
34 per cent of GDP and nearly 180,000 full-
time jobs. 
The network gives members the ability to take 
large-scale collective action. The Sustainable 
Business Council is part of the BusinessNZ 
network and is the National Global Network 
partner to the World Business Council for 
Sustainable Development. 
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 27Our long-term 
emissions reduction 
strategy
The emissions reduction plan is a roadmap for meeting 
the first emissions budget (2022–2025), staying on  
track to meet our next emissions budgets and reaching 
the 2050 target. 
The next sections contextualise the detailed policies  
and strategies that will follow in mid-2022 and  
provide the long-term strategic direction for  
the systems and sectors included in the final  
emissions reduction plan.System settings
To foster low-emissions development and avoid locking 
in high-emissions pathways, we must align system 
settings across all sectors. This will help to bring about 
the economy-wide transformation we need over time.Government accountability  
and coordination 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION Long-term strategy
Keep government institutions fit   We will:
for purpose, moving the country   ►  make government institutions and 
to a low-emissions economy and  processes fit to respond to climate change 
challenges, through stronger accountability 
leading by example. 
and better public monitoring and reporting 
on progress
State of play
►  continue to strengthen the regulations, to 
The Government must address climate change 
align all policies, investments and strategic 
when making decisions, lead by example and 
direction with a low-emissions future
be accountable for meeting the budgets and 
wider reduction targets.  ►  provide funding and resources for climate 
action, and promote greater private sector 
What we are doing now investment in the transition. 
A number of measures already provide greater 
accountability and coordination across the 
Government. For example, we have: 
►  made climate change a government priority 
and established the Climate Response 
Ministerial Group, chaired by the Prime 
Minister and supported by the Climate 
Change Chief Executives Board
►  aligned the Government procurement  
system with low emissions and invested 
heavily in state sector decarbonisation
►  established the CNGP, which aims  
to make a number of public organisations 
carbon neutral from 2025.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 31Funding and finance 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION What we are doing now 
Public and private funding and  Aligning public finance
The Government is considering how the 
finance help to drive the transition 
public finance system can better support 
to a sustainable, low-emissions, 
climate objectives, including ways to: 
climate-resilient future.
►  prioritise spending for positive climate 
action through the annual government 
State of play
Budget process
Finance is an important catalyst for lowering 
►  assess and report on what gets funded 
emissions and increasing climate resilience. 
through public spending, including how 
It can reduce emissions directly, as well as 
well this aligns with our climate objectives
support others to invest in and undertake 
low-emission activities.  ►  coordinate and encourage private sector 
investment in climate-positive initiatives
There is no single ‘right’ way to direct the 
flow of finance towards climate goals; rather  ►  effectively co-invest with the private sector 
to accelerate climate-positive investment
we must consider a portfolio of options to 
achieve the outcomes we seek. ►  recycle proceeds from the New Zealand 
Emissions Trading Scheme into climate 
For an overview of current government 
spending.
work (at mid-2021), within the context of 
broader international trends, see International 
Initial work in these areas will inform the next 
Developments in Sustainability Reporting.6 
Government Budget. It will build on a number 
of existing government funds and programmes 
that support low-emissions activities, such as 
the Government Investment in Decarbonising 
Industry Fund, the Low Emission Transport 
Fund and the technology demonstration 
funding programme.
6  Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment. 2021. International developments in sustainability reporting. Wellington: Ministry of Business, 
Innovation and Employment.
32 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyGovernment agencies are also looking at  ►  introduced mandatory climate-related 
novel ways to boost public investment in low- disclosures in 2021 to help investors 
emissions activities. For example, Kāinga Ora  better understand climate-change-related 
(the agency that delivers the Government’s  risks and opportunities, and support 
priorities for housing and urban development)  investor activity. The Financial Markets 
launched its Sustainability Financing  Markets Authority (the agency responsible 
Framework in 2020, to support investment   for financial regulation) also published 
in green buildings.  its disclosure framework for integrated 
financial products in late 2020, to support 
Mobilising private finance
the growing market for environmental, 
The investment needs of a climate change 
social and governance funds
response cannot be met by public finance 
►  mobilised private finance to help regional 
alone. There are significant opportunities for 
economies become more productive, 
private investors in expanding green finance 
resilient, inclusive, sustainable and Māori-
markets. In fact, the private sector is already 
enabling. This has been done through 
taking these opportunities, for example, 
the Ministry of Business, Innovation and 
through the recently launched Sustainable 
Employment’s $200 million Regional 
Finance Centre.
Strategic Partnership Fund.8
Over the past three years, the Government 
has taken steps to support the private sector  Long-term strategy
to undertake climate-aligned investment.  
Given the breadth, scale and duration of  
For example, it has: 
the transition to a low-emissions economy,  
►  established New Zealand Green Investment  we will:
Finance Limited (NZGIF) in 2018, to direct 
►  ensure adequate, durable and certain 
private sector capital into investments that 
public funding for climate action
reduce emissions. The latest Government 
Budget provided an additional $300 million  ►  thoroughly consider climate change at 
every stage of decision-making for the  
for NZGIF to invest in decarbonising public 
use of public funds
transport, waste and plastics
►  banned default KiwiSaver7 funds from  ►  support climate-positive private  
investment through co-funding, 
investing in fossil fuels 
overcoming information barriers and 
regulating where necessary. 
7  KiwiSaver is a voluntary government savings scheme to help New Zealanders save for their retirement. 
8  In 2020, a new $200 million strategic partnership fund was established to accelerate the development of local plans by regional economic 
development agencies while continuing to roll out individually funded Provincial Growth Fund projects over the next parliamentary term. This is 
administered by the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment’s Kānoa – Regional Economic Development and Investment Unit (REDIU).
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 33Emissions pricing 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION  State of play
Emissions and removals are priced  The New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme 
using appropriate mechanisms.  (NZ ETS) plays an important role in driving 
emissions reductions. Recent amendments 
These play a key role in aligning 
ensure it continues to help us meet our 
emissions and financial flows with 
domestic and international targets. 
domestic and international targets.
The NZ ETS has the world’s broadest sector 
By 2050, the New Zealand Emissions  coverage. Gross emissions from all sectors, 
Trading Scheme cap will be at   except agriculture, are priced via the NZ ETS 
and the Synthetic Greenhouse Gas Levy. 
net zero. Only unavoidable emissions 
Eligible foresters can also choose to join the 
will be offset via removals or 
NZ ETS and take responsibility for emissions 
offshore mitigation.
and removals from their forests.
The He Waka Eke Noa partnership (see  
page 56) is developing a suitable mechanism 
to price agricultural emissions by 2025. 
34 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyKey challenges Long-term strategy
The Government sets and reduces the number 
We will: 
of units supplied into the NZ ETS over time 
►  apply economy-wide emissions pricing 
(not including units provided for removals). 
through the NZ ETS and an appropriate 
This is done through a ‘cap’ set on a rolling  pricing mechanism for agricultural 
five-year basis. Cap settings and auction  emissions
price controls will be aligned with our targets. 
►  align pricing with the targets and ensure 
Decisions on the emissions reduction plan, 
they work with non-pricing policies. The 
and the plan for achieving the NDC will 
NZ ETS cap, auction price settings and 
determine these NZ ETS settings. 
any potential links to international carbon 
Challenges include managing the settings to  markets will need to be aligned with plans 
account for non-price policies and measures;  for achieving targets and the NDC. This will 
and coordinating the settings with those for  be informed by independent advice from 
agricultural pricing, to ensure Aotearoa meets  the Climate Change Commission
its domestic targets.
►  strengthen NZ ETS market governance 
The significant stockpile of units held by  to keep it fit for purpose and discourage 
private participants puts pressure on the  market misconduct as the market evolves
NZ ETS. This is being managed over time by 
►  ensure NZ ETS settings are appropriately 
‘stockpile adjustments’, which decrease the 
adjusted as necessary if offshore mitigation 
number of units that will be auctioned into  
is needed to meet the NDC (eg, via the 
the scheme.
quantitative limit on the use of approved 
The risk of emissions leakage remains  offshore mitigation)
a concern.9 The current practice of free  ►  develop procedures for approving the  
allocation to emissions-intensive and   use of any offshore mitigation within the  
trade-exposed firms is targeted, and we are  NZ ETS and ensure compatibility with  
phasing out allocation rates. However, there  Paris Agreement requirements.
is tension between the purpose of allocation 
(reducing the risk of emissions leakage) 
and the purpose of the NZ ETS (reducing 
emissions). A review of industrial allocation 
policy is underway. 
9  Emissions leakage describes situations where emissions pricing drives production and associated emissions overseas, leading to an increase in  
global emissions.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 35Planning and infrastructure 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION Competing land use is putting pressure on  
the environment and economy. Environmental 
Strategic planning, investing in 
monitoring and reporting highlight the loss  
infrastructure, and managing land 
of productive land to urban sprawl. There  
and resources help us meet our  are also mounting environmental pressures 
targets, build climate resilience and  from rural and productive land use, such as 
the impact of farming on freshwater and  
improve people’s wellbeing.
soil health. 
State of play There is an urgent need for more housing. The 
planning system can facilitate where and how 
The planning system and infrastructure are 
we grow towns and cities, and promote low-
not geared towards driving down greenhouse 
emissions buildings, transport and urban form. 
gas emissions. We are in the process of 
reforming the resource management and  The current system has been piecemeal, with 
planning system. a narrow focus with respect to mitigation. 
Until recently, it did not nationally address 
Key challenges 
changes to planning laws and development 
Urban development decisions have not 
of national direction on industrial greenhouse 
prioritised reducing emissions. Recent 
gas emissions. 
progress has been made in promoting well-
There are tensions between environmental 
serviced, medium and high-density, mixed-use 
values, such as biodiversity and freshwater, 
development. However, these projects remain 
and low-emissions activities (eg, renewable 
largely constrained by barriers such as zoning 
electricity generation). Not enough focus  
rules, a multi-decade infrastructure deficit and 
has been placed on integrating goals for 
difficulties in coordinating land-use planning 
multiple benefits. Larger councils have taken 
with infrastructure investment. 
local action, but this should fit more closely 
Despite significant demand for housing 
with the actions of other councils and  
close to urban centres, the barriers have 
the Government. 
historically led to low-density and often car-
The planning system has not encouraged  
dependent greenfield development in outer 
the private sector to cut emissions and there 
suburbs, resulting in poorly functioning urban 
are still barriers that affect the ability of 
form. This pattern has significantly increased 
planning and infrastructure to support the 
transport emissions and household costs 
transition. We need to remove these barriers 
for land, transport and energy; and reduced 
and boost incentives for low-emissions 
housing variety and choice. It has also 
buildings and medium and high densities in 
increased embodied and other emissions  
mixed-use neighbourhoods close to centres  
from construction. 
or rapid transit. 
36 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyWhat we are doing now Long-term strategy
For the past 30 years, the Resource 
We will:
Management Act 1991 has largely governed 
►  integrate climate objectives into the 
the way we manage the environment. Reforms 
reformed planning legislation with the 
are underway and provide an opportunity to 
necessary levers to drive down emissions. 
integrate emissions reduction into land-use 
We will increase infrastructure funding  
planning and investment.
for this
Other initiatives include:
►  partner with Māori so that planning 
►  national direction10 for urban development reforms reflect the relationship of iwi and 
hapū to the environment, as well as their 
►  national direction on industrial emissions
rights and interests 
►  urban design schemes for safe, accessible, 
liveable neighbourhoods at a small scale ►  support local government climate action 
and develop frameworks for funding  
►  partnerships between the Government, 
and financing 
local government, iwi and hapū to produce 
long-term spatial plans for high-growth  ►  remove barriers and encourage low-
emissions urban development; this includes 
regions, with well-planned intensification 
reducing embodied and operational and 
and public transport-oriented projects
enabled use emissions, and optimising 
►  Kāinga Ora: a large-scale urban 
infrastructure types and locations to 
regeneration programme, building energy-
reduce emissions
efficient, low-emissions buildings in 
neighbourhoods with sustainable transport.  ►  develop tools and gather data and evidence 
so that urban centres can plan for growth 
This is aided by the Housing Acceleration 
and infrastructure 
Fund for infrastructure and by work to 
apply a climate lens to urban planning. ►  drive behaviour change through better 
public education and increased awareness
►  work with the private sector to remove 
barriers to reducing emissions.
10  Local authorities largely implement the Resource Management Act 1991. The Government can support implementation on national, regional or local 
issues using tools we call national direction. These support local planning and can take the form of national policy statements, national environmental 
standards, national planning standards and regulations. We have a national policy statement on urban development that supports well-functioning 
urban environments and includes objectives for climate mitigation and adaptation.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 37Research, science, 
technology and innovation
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION  State of play
Research, science and innovation  RSI provides new knowledge and technologies 
(RSI) provides the knowledge and  that mitigate the risks and realise the 
opportunities from reducing emissions. It 
insights to transform Aotearoa into 
partners with the private sector to enable 
a low-emissions economy that 
mitigation and adaptation, which is an 
achieves economic prosperity  
essential activity in transforming Aotearoa to 
and improved wellbeing for all.  a prosperous low-emissions future at pace. 
This, in conjunction with forming strategic 
Good access to new knowledge, 
partnerships with sectors and international 
technologies and processes 
organisations, can accelerate the path 
can inform decisions and help  towards a higher-value economy delivering 
communities, iwi, government   a healthy environment and wellbeing for all 
New Zealanders. 
and businesses remain resilient  
in a changing climate.  The Government invests across the system, 
from frontier research to business support 
RSI drives the development and  for innovative firms bringing new solutions 
deployment of innovative low- to market. This includes enabling Aotearoa 
to be an active participant globally in the 
emissions solutions into existing 
development and adoption of transformative 
industries and sectors, accelerating 
knowledge and technology. However, a lack 
our economic transition. 
of coordination and connectedness within the 
RSI system can be a barrier to fully realising 
RSI enables the growth of new 
this transformation.
sectors, market opportunities and 
high-value jobs, which in turn leads 
to transformation and an equitable 
transition.
38 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyThe RSI system structurally supports  An ongoing programme of sustained 
decarbonisation on three fronts. investment in areas with the potential to 
create competitive advantage in the global 
►  Developing the knowledge needed for 
green economy is needed to achieve the 
informed decision-making: A growing 
economic transformation required and create 
knowledge base helps the Government, 
a just transition for all. 
iwi, communities and businesses to do 
things better and make informed decisions. 
What we are doing now
Mātauranga Māori enhances our ability 
The Government is committed to increasing 
to frame problems and develop solutions, 
expenditure to stimulate research and 
while international partnerships expand  
development activity and developing a  
our capability frontier. 
more connected and coordinated RSI system. 
►  Using innovation to overcome barriers 
This would enhance the existing activity 
to sector decarbonisation by partnering 
that the RSI system contributes to emissions 
with sectors and providing support to 
reduction efforts. 
accelerate innovation: Novel methods can 
solve the challenges in reducing emissions  Existing initiatives include: 
in domestic sectors. RSI can help through  ►  science funding mechanisms that enable 
the exploration, piloting and translation of  scientists to deliver an increasing volume of 
international technologies and practices. public good science that directly addresses 
our country’s challenges. The Government 
►  Maximising our impact in the global 
has increased the climate signals in our 
green economy: Cutting-edge science 
flagship funds (eg, Endeavour) to encourage 
expertise and innovators give Aotearoa an 
this growth
advantage in designing new, low-emissions 
technology, building frontier firms and  ►  contributing to an international 
creating new sectors. As well as providing  understanding of the impacts of climate 
an economic growth opportunity, exporting  change, for example, through the 
domestic innovation means we can have a  Global Research Alliance on Agricultural 
global impact on emissions reduction. New  Greenhouse Gases
opportunities will create jobs that underpin 
►  supporting fundamental advances in the 
a just transition. 
technology required to transition our 
emitting sectors (eg, hydrogen catalysis 
At 1.4 per cent of GDP, current investment in 
supported by the Advanced Energy 
RSI is insufficient to transform Aotearoa into 
Technology Platform) 
a high-value economy that achieves net-zero 
emissions by 2050 and improves wellbeing.  ►  supporting the development and 
application of mātauranga Māori in the 
science system, including through the 
Vision Mātauranga Capability Fund
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 39►  supporting innovative firms with a range of  involves initiatives to pilot emerging 
grants and tax incentives to take advantage  technologies and de-risk its adoption by 
of the global demand for green innovation.  providing confidence in the effectiveness 
These firms include Mint Innovation, which  of novel low-emissions technologies. 
uses biorefining technology to extract  This support ensures that Aotearoa is an 
precious metals from e-waste, and ZeroJet,  active participant in the global market 
which makes electric jet propulsion  for technology, as both a developer 
systems for small boats. and a procurer. A notable example is 
the Government’s current investment 
The RSI system supports sectors and 
to encourage low-emissions energy 
communities through:
innovation and technology including the 
►  developing strategic partnerships for  development of green hydrogen and 
impact. Partnering with iwi, regulators,  sustainable aviation fuels.
sector policy leads, international research 
organisations and frontier firms to ensure  Key challenges
research and innovation has impact.   Strategic investment required to enable  
One existing programme is the Innovative  the transformation of our economy
Partnerships Programme, which attracts 
The transformation to a prosperous low-
frontier firms to conduct research and 
emissions future requires a step change in 
development, invest and build a sustained 
investment. This will involve the creation of 
presence in Aotearoa and ensure  
new industries and radical changes to existing 
the country is an attractive testbed for  
industries. It will also require the creation  
new technology
of jobs that support a just transition to a  
►  deploying tools to support knowledge  low-emissions future. Wider transformation  
development, transitioning sectors and the  of the economy will require a deeper 
unlocking of opportunities. This involves  evaluation of investments in science and 
funding and co-investing in initiatives and  innovation, and expanding into new frontiers.
infrastructure that play a fundamental role 
While we have some idea of the future state 
in our response to climate change. The 
of a decarbonised economy, there is still 
RSI system also plays an important role in 
uncertainty around the source and magnitude 
the talent pipeline for sectors, in the form 
of gains from future scientific discoveries and 
of both an international talent attraction 
innovation. This will mean that, while we have 
strategy and domestic talent development
to be pragmatic, we must also balance the 
►  supporting the development, assessment  need to move swiftly from idea to impact. The 
and deployment of technology.  Government will need to play a coordinating 
Technology will help sectors to reduce  and facilitating role to support the supply  
their emissions and underpin many of  of innovative ideas and increase demand for  
the new opportunities associated with  low-emissions innovation.
a low-emissions economy. This support 
40 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyNo individual country will produce all of  Long-term strategy
the science and solve all of the innovation 
To ensure our RSI system meets these 
challenges associated with the transformation 
challenges, the Government is supporting:
to a low-emissions future. In addition to 
providing local capability, the RSI system  ►  a higher-intensity knowledge economy 
must help transform transitioning sectors  through strategic investments in research 
and communities by identifying and engaging  and science
with offshore initiatives. It must also help  ►  structural reform of the science system to 
to translate international technology and  deliver a more coordinated and connected 
practices, so they are suitable in our national  research and innovation system that 
context. This will require aligning science  has clear priorities. This enables deeper 
priorities and research with international  integration of the RSI system with all 
efforts, supporting innovative firms to   sectors through a fluid exchange of 
deliver green technology to consumers,  knowledge, talent and solutions. This will 
attracting innovation talent from overseas   enhance direct support for climate science 
and supporting Aotearoa to become a   and advanced technology
testbed for low-emissions technology. 
►  mātauranga Māori both as a frame for 
Absorptive capacity for mitigation   understanding the challenges climate 
and adaption change presents and as a source of 
An important challenge is to ensure low- sustainable, innovative solutions for  
emissions innovation and technologies are  the future
available in a much shorter timeframe than   ►  strategic international partnerships to 
is achievable by waiting for market forces   deepen our connectedness to the global 
to drive demand for innovation. This will  knowledge and innovation frontier 
require the Government to actively de-risk  associated with a prosperous low-emissions 
and support the development and translation  future. This includes encouraging global 
of innovation into our national context. innovators to use Aotearoa as a testbed for 
pioneering low-emissions technologies and 
To accelerate the impact from innovation, 
approaches, which will promote uptake of 
we need to coordinate and align research 
innovation by communities and firms
and development, frontier firms, investment, 
talent, regulation and market development.  ►  the accelerated uptake of clean technology 
With the short timescale for the transition,  into sector. This includes strategic 
and the breadth of science and innovation  investment in advanced technologies with 
required, our RSI system must be adaptable,  the potential to play an important role in 
resilient, connected to the global frontier,  our low-emissions future.
and able to deliver and absorb innovation  
at pace. 
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 41Circular economy  
and bioeconomy 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION  State of play
The Aotearoa economy is high- Many parts of the world are shifting to a 
value and underpinned by circular  circular economy: designing out waste and 
pollution; keeping products and materials 
practices, skills, innovation and 
in use and maintaining their value; and 
the efficient use of renewable 
regenerating natural systems.11 These steps 
bioresources. Economic activity  
recognise the interdependency between the 
is designed to take place within,  natural world and economic activity.
and to regenerate, the natural 
A distinctive Aotearoa approach to a circular 
environment, create jobs and  economy is emerging. This draws from te 
improve wellbeing for all.  ao Māori worldview, takes responsibility for 
future generations and builds in equitable 
and inclusive outcomes for people and 
communities. It also reflects our unique 
natural environment and the knowledge of 
our world-leading primary sector.
A bioeconomy provides renewable resources, 
like wood and other plant products, that can 
be used to displace fossil fuel-based products. 
When used sustainably, they can lead to high-
value products that allow us to operate within 
the biogenic carbon cycle and regenerate 
natural systems. In this way, our bioeconomy 
can be seen as a component of a circular 
economy. 
Moving to a circular economy will make an 
important contribution to reducing emissions. 
Globally, 45 per cent of emissions come from 
making products – everyday items like cars 
and clothes – and activities such as managing 
land.12 Using finite resources more efficiently 
and in circular ways can also yield co-benefits, 
such as less reliance on imported materials 
and a more resilient economy and society. 
11  Ellen MacArthur Foundation. What is a circular economy? Retrieved 28 October 2021. 
12  Ellen MacArthur Foundation. 2019. Completing the picture: How the circular economy tackles climate change. Ellen MacArthur Foundation, p 13.
42 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyKey challenges and opportunities Long-term strategy
Aotearoa currently has a largely linear 
Aotearoa is in the early stages of developing a 
economy – extracting resources, converting 
circular economy with a thriving bioeconomy. 
them into a product, and using and then 
To support this shift, we will:
discarding them. This model is highly 
►  build on the actions underway in the waste 
emissions-intensive. 
sector, including through a new national 
The move to a circular economy will  
waste strategy and updated legislation
involve a significant shift in how many 
►  partner with Māori on a long-term, 
New Zealanders value materials and  
cross-sector strategy that supports this 
products. It will also require us to move  
transition. This will yield benefits across 
away from entrenched patterns of  
the four wellbeings: social, economic, 
production and use. 
environmental and cultural.
A thriving bioeconomy will require the 
sustainable management of limited 
bioresources. Both will require learning 
and change on many fronts: technological, 
financial, behavioural and cultural. 
These changes are also an opportunity to 
rethink and strengthen the economy for the 
long term. As well as reducing emissions, we 
can find new ways of doing business in regions 
and communities that are regenerative, are 
inclusive by design and enhance wellbeing  
for current and future generations. 
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 43Sector plans
Tailored measures will help key sectors take  
up opportunities, reduce emissions and increase  
forestry removals.Transport 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION  Key challenges
Causes of these high per capita  
Aotearoa will reduce transport 
emissions include: 
emissions to net zero by 2050,  
►  heavy reliance on fossil fuels for transport. 
while building a healthy,  
Electricity and biofuels made up less than 
safe, equitable and accessible 
0.2 per cent of transport fuels in 2020. In 
transport system.
comparison, in Sweden, renewable fuels 
contributed 14.7 per cent in 2015
State of play 
►  poor fuel economy of light vehicles 
Transport currently produces over   entering our fleet. In 2020, light passenger 
19.6 per cent of our domestic greenhouse  vehicles (cars and SUVs) entering the fleet 
gas emissions, and almost half of our CO   had an average reported emission intensity 
2
emissions. Transport emissions have risen  of 158 grams of CO  per kilometre travelled 
2
more than any other emissions source, with   (g CO /km); for light commercial vehicles 
2
an increase of over 84 per cent between   (vans and utilities), the figure was 219 g 
1990 and 2019.  CO /km. In contrast, the figure for Europe 
2
was 122 g CO /km for cars and 158 g  
Of the 43 Organisation for Economic   2
CO /km for light commercial vehicles 
Co-operation and Development (OECD)  2
registered in 2019
countries that track these emissions, Aotearoa 
has the fifth-highest per capita rates of CO ►  reliance on road freight. Seventy per cent 
2 
emissions from road transport.  of freight moves by road, 16 per cent by rail 
and 14 per cent by coastal shipping
►  urban areas characterised by sprawling 
low-density land-use patterns supported  
by motorways. This has contributed to 
vehicle dependence and has limited the 
potential for public transport and active 
transport use
►  decades of planning and funding for travel 
by private car that have encouraged car use 
over alternatives, for example, by building 
extra lanes to solve traffic problems, rather 
than changing how we travel.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 45Sectors connected with the transport sector  ►  transitioning to a low-emissions 
have a significant impact on transport  government fleet (implemented), with the 
emissions. It will be important to collaborate  aim of cleaning up the Government’s fleet 
with these sectors, which include the planning  by reducing its number of vehicles and 
system, housing and urban development, the  choosing electric or hybrid vehicles unless 
energy sector and the tax system. operational requirements prevent this
►  the zero-emissions vehicle (ZEV) mandate. 
What we are doing now
The Government has created a mechanism 
Existing initiatives include:
to ensure there is a minimum percentage  
►  extending the light electric vehicle (EV)  of ZEVs in the imported light vehicle 
exemption from road user charges to  supply. It will be used if the Clean Car 
2024, which will continue to encourage  Standard and Clean Car Discount do not 
New Zealanders to buy light EVs prompt enough supply of ZEVs
►  the Low Emissions Transport Fund   ►  extending heavy EV exemption from 
(scope and funding increased from 2021).  road user charges, which will encourage 
Co-funding will help industries and groups  businesses to buy heavy EVs. We are 
to demonstrate and adopt low-emissions  looking to amend current legislation (the 
transport technology, vehicles, innovation  Road User Charges Act 2012) to expand 
and infrastructure the duration of the exemption and bring  
►  the Clean Car Discount (implementation  in differential charging based on fuel  
underway), which will encourage  or emissions
New Zealanders to buy cleaner vehicles,   ►  decarbonising public transport to reduce 
by addressing the high upfront cost   emissions and improve air quality in towns 
with incentives. In early 2022, a charge   and cities. We have committed to requiring 
on high-emitting vehicles will apply at   only zero-emissions public transport buses 
point of first registration in Aotearoa, to  to be purchased by 2025, and to a target 
discourage purchase of decarbonising the public transport bus 
►  the Clean Car Standard (to be implemented  fleet by 2035
in 2022), which will support a cleaner  ►  the New Zealand Rail Plan, which lays out a 
vehicle fleet by improving the efficiency   10-year vision to increase investment and 
of imported new and used light vehicles.   resilience in the rail network
It will be strengthened over time
46 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy►  coastal shipping investment, which  Long-term strategy
allocates $30–45 million from the 
We will support central and local government, 
National Land Transport Fund to identify 
communities and businesses to work together 
opportunities for coastal shipping  
to reduce emissions and build a healthy, safe 
and promote a shift to this lower- 
and accessible transport system. We will also 
emissions mode
take opportunities to improve the wellbeing of 
►  acceding to Annex VI of the International  New Zealanders.
Convention for the Prevention of Pollution 
Actions include: 
from Ships (MARPOL). Aotearoa will ratify 
this in 2022 and apply new measures to  ►  reducing reliance on cars and supporting 
reduce ship emissions. We have agreed to  people to walk, cycle and use public 
prepare a national action plan to reduce  transport
maritime emissions, and to research ways  ►  rapidly adopting EVs (and low-emission 
to speed the uptake of alternative low- and  fuels)
zero-carbon fuels for shipping
►  decarbonising heavy transport and freight.
►  ensuring planning helps to reduce car 
dependency by leveraging opportunities 
associated with resource management 
reform and the Urban Growth Agenda.
However, broader and deeper changes are 
needed to quickly shift the transport system 
to a zero-emissions pathway. 
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 47Energy and industry 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION  ►  energy supply is secure, resilient  
and reliable throughout the transition  
Aotearoa has a highly renewable, 
and beyond 
net-zero emissions energy system. 
►  energy systems support economic 
Energy is accessible and affordable 
development and productivity growth,  
and supports the wellbeing of all 
in line with the transition. 
New Zealanders. Energy supply 
Components to manage through this 
is secure, resilient and reliable. 
transition include: 
Energy systems support economic 
►  managing the phase-out of fossil fuels, 
development and productivity 
including by:
growth that align with the transition 
>  ensuring reliable energy supply for 
to a low-emissions future.
industry as well as residential and  
other consumers
State of play 
>  supporting the phase-down of domestic 
The energy and industry sectors are  fossil fuel production following the 
essential for the economy and the lives of  ending of new permits for offshore oil 
New Zealanders. They provide electricity to  and gas exploration
light and heat homes and workplaces, and the 
>  ensuring a just transition for affected 
heat that powers manufacturing and industry. 
businesses, employees and communities
Their performance affects the cost and quality 
of many goods and services we use on a daily  ►  encouraging investment in new renewable 
basis, and the competitiveness of businesses. electricity generation and infrastructure, 
and large-scale energy storage 
In 2019, these sectors made up 26 per cent 
of total gross emissions. These emissions are  ►  assisting New Zealanders to engage in the 
projected to decrease by 22 per cent from  energy system through household and local 
2019 levels by 2025, 21 per cent by 2030   technology solutions, including efficient 
and 21 per cent by 2035.13 management of energy resources
►  increasing the availability and use of low-
Key challenges 
emissions fuels
As these sectors transition over the next  
►  supporting the pathway for transition 
30 years, we must ensure that:
for other sectors, such as transport, and 
►  energy remains accessible and   building and construction.
affordable to support the wellbeing  
of all New Zealanders 
13  The stationary energy emissions projection is from the Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment’s (MBIE’s) updated Electricity Demand 
and Generation Scenarios (EDGS). Since the release of the EDGS in 2019, MBIE has included the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic in the 2021 
projection. This will be published in Energy in New Zealand 2021 (forthcoming). The non-energy emissions projection for industrial processes and 
product use is provided by the Ministry for the Environment.
48 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyWhat we are doing now ►  developing national direction to phase out 
coal boilers for low–medium temperature 
We are well positioned to tackle emissions in 
process heat by 2037 
the energy and industry sectors because of 
the high level of renewable electricity, but   ►  accelerating renewable electricity by:
we must do more. 
>  investigating options to manage ‘dry 
We must move to a more renewable  year’ risk and move towards 100 per 
electricity system as we head towards the  cent renewable electricity through the 
2050 target. Accelerating the rollout of  New Zealand Battery Project 
renewable electricity generation will be a 
>  reviewing planning instruments to speed 
significant factor in replacing fossil fuels  
development of renewable electricity 
in other sectors. 
►  encouraging the uptake of energy 
The Government has an aspirational target of 
efficiency through product regulations and 
100 per cent renewable electricity by 2030. 
programmes, such as Warmer Kiwi Homes 
This will be reviewed in 2025. It will allow 
time for more information on solutions to the  ►  developing A Vision for Hydrogen in 
‘dry year’ challenge to be identified through  New Zealand to outline potential uses of 
the New Zealand Battery Project. hydrogen, funding demonstration projects 
and building international partnerships.
The NZ ETS is an important tool to help 
reduce emissions in these sectors. A rising 
Long-term strategy
carbon price discourages fossil fuel use and 
We will continue to:
encourages investment in energy efficiency 
and fuel-switching.  ►  accelerate renewable electricity and 
prepare the electricity system for future 
Other measures aim to reduce emissions in 
needs and technologies, including large-
areas that are not responsive to emissions 
scale energy storage
pricing, to unlock co-benefits or to address 
the distributional impacts of the transition.  ►  improve the uptake of energy efficiency 
and demand-side management measures 
The Government’s Renewable Energy 
Strategy Work Programme has guided work to  ►  help businesses and industry to 
decarbonise energy and industry, including by: decarbonise
►  assisting industry to decarbonise through  ►  encourage development and use of 
low-emissions energy sources, such as 
the Energy Efficiency and Conservation 
bioenergy and hydrogen
Authority’s business support programmes, 
and the $70 million Government  ►  manage the phase-down of fossil  
Investment in Decarbonising Industry Fund  fuels, including in electricity generation, 
to drive the uptake of energy efficiency   manufacturing and industry, and  
and fuel-switching  in buildings. 
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 49Building and construction 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION  materials and waste (known as embodied 
emissions). Under this approach, most 
Building-related emissions are 
building-related emissions are accounted  
significantly reduced and, in doing 
for in the energy, industry, waste and 
so, we see other benefits from  transport sectors. 
better homes and buildings, such 
We are using the ‘consumption’ approach as 
as improved health, economic and  it provides opportunities to reduce emissions 
social outcomes.  across the whole economy.
The sector is making an important  What we are doing now
contribution to the net-zero target  Transformational change of both the system 
and sector is required to lower emissions and 
and to higher living standards for 
improve building quality. We must also help 
New Zealanders.
the sector to address other challenges, such as 
workforce and supply shortages. In Aotearoa, 
State of play
housing affordability is an issue that actions  
Building-related emissions can be quantified  to reduce emissions must address.
in two ways: the ‘consumption’ approach and 
The Building for Climate Change programme 
the ‘production’ approach. 
is the main platform to reduce emissions from 
Under the production approach,14 in 2018, 
the sector. Regulations under consideration 
buildings generated 4 per cent of the nation’s 
include:
long-lived emissions, mainly from fossil fuels.
►  mandatory reporting and caps to improve 
Under the consumption approach,15 the  the operational efficiency of all new 
sector contributes about 15 per cent of  buildings, which could include caps for 
Aotearoa’s long-lived emissions. Across a  carbon emissions, fossil fuel and water use 
building’s lifespan, about half of the emissions 
►  mandatory reporting and caps to reduce 
are generated by the energy used to heat, 
whole-of-life embodied carbon emissions 
cool and otherwise run buildings (known as 
in all new buildings
operational emissions). The other half relate 
►  changes to the New Zealand Building 
to building materials and processes used 
Code to strengthen energy efficiency 
across a building’s lifespan for construction, 
requirements, enhancing the Building Code 
renovation, deconstruction, transport of 
changes consulted on earlier in 2021.
14  A production approach takes account of emissions at the point where they are ‘produced’, that is, when human activity leads to the emissions being 
released into the environment. For example, emissions from coal used to generate electricity for a building are accounted for at the power station 
(in the energy sector). In contrast, emissions from coal used directly in a boiler in a building are accounted for at the building (in the building and 
construction sector). This is the international standard for greenhouse gas reporting. 
15  A consumption approach takes account of emissions at the point where they are ‘consumed’ and includes all the emissions from a product or service 
across its entire supply chain. For example, this would include all the emissions from extracting materials for use in a building product, through to 
their manufacture and end use in a building. This approach includes any related transport, energy, waste or other emissions produced from the point 
of extraction to their final use. 
50 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyThe proposed regulatory changes would   We are focused on reducing emissions 
be complemented by measures that increase  in a way that realises co-benefits for 
consumer demand for and industry supply   New Zealanders, where possible. Buildings 
of lower-emissions and more climate-  that are better insulated, drier and warmer 
resilient buildings.  require less energy to operate and contribute 
to improved health, economic and social 
These could include initiatives that build  
outcomes for the families and whānau living in 
on existing low-emission actions across  
them. Medium- and higher-density buildings, 
the sector. They could also encourage  
supported by planning and transport 
early adopters to start reducing their 
networks, can reduce building-related 
emissions now, before potential regulatory 
emissions while connecting communities and 
change occurs.
improving social and individual wellbeing. 
We are using government property portfolios 
and procurement roles to reduce building- Long-term strategy
related emissions and send a signal to the  
We will further implement policies and actions 
rest of the sector. For example, Kāinga Ora –  
through programmes such as Building for 
Homes and Communities has pilot projects to 
Climate Change, and continue to leverage the 
show how to build lower-emissions, quality 
Government’s property and portfolio roles. 
housing developments at scale. 
This will:
Certain government office buildings 
►  make buildings more energy efficient to run
must meet third-party energy efficiency 
►  reduce whole-of-life carbon emissions  
requirements. All agencies must use the 
from buildings
Sustainable Construction Procurement 
guidelines when procuring construction  ►  produce resilient buildings, suitable for  
projects.  the changing climate where they are built
We are partnering with industry through  ►  reduce emissions in other parts of the 
the Construction Sector Accord to jointly  economy, including energy and industry, 
address long-standing challenges, including  waste and transport.
climate change. The Accord’s three-year 
We will continue to work with the sector 
transformation plan is changing behaviour to 
and Tiriti partners to continue an equitable 
lift overall performance, make a safer, better-
transition for workers, including creating  
skilled and more productive industry and 
jobs that contribute to high-quality, low-
share good practice. This collaboration will 
emissions construction.
help us to make an equitable transition. 
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 51Waste 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION What we are doing now
Existing initiatives include:
Aotearoa has a circular economy  
that keeps materials in use for   ►  the National Environmental Standards for 
Air Quality (introduced in 2004), which 
as long as possible and has reduced 
manage discharges to air of greenhouse 
waste emissions in line with  
gases (mainly methane) from large landfills, 
the 2030 and 2050 targets for 
requiring these sites to collect and destroy 
biogenic methane. methane emissions
►  the Waste Minimisation Act 2008, which 
State of play  aims to reduce the environmental harm 
Waste sector emissions (of which 92 per cent  caused by waste and to provide economic, 
are methane) account for around 4 per cent of  social and cultural benefits
gross greenhouse gas emissions; 81 per cent  ►  the waste disposal levy (since 2009), which 
are from solid waste disposed to landfill. raises revenue for promoting and achieving 
waste minimisation. It increases the cost  
Key challenges 
of waste disposal to recognise the costs  
Per person, Aotearoa is among the highest 
of waste to the environment, society and 
disposers of municipal waste in the OECD. 
the economy
This is due to a relatively high amount and 
►  the Waste Minimisation Fund (established 
broad geographic spread of waste from our 
2010), which supports projects that may 
urban areas and primary industries, combined 
reduce emissions from waste
with the abundance and low cost of landfills.
►  the NZ ETS (since 2013), which  
Transitioning to a circular economy will require 
prices emissions from municipal waste 
a major shift in consumption behaviours and 
disposal facilities.
development of enabling policies, resource 
recovery systems and infrastructure.
Significant data gaps exist for some waste 
types, including from construction and 
demolition, and farm fills. 
52 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyCollectively, these measures have reduced  Long-term strategy
waste emissions over the past 15 years,  
We will:
but we need to take further action. We  
have recently:  ►  apply circular economy principles, refresh 
the waste strategy and update legislation
►  adopted a waste work programme to 
accelerate the transition to a low-emissions  ►  substantially improve our systems, enable 
behaviour change at many levels and 
circular economy. From 2021, it will build 
increase investment in infrastructure 
the foundations for a transformed waste 
through measures that:
system. This includes a long-term waste 
strategy and a waste infrastructure  
>  reduce the waste produced
plan, new waste legislation and improved 
>  reduce the organic waste sent to landfill 
waste data systems, in line with  
by diverting it to beneficial uses
emissions budgets
>  enhance the capture of landfill gas.
►  increased the rate of the waste disposal 
levy and expanded it to cover more classes  To contribute to the biogenic methane targets, 
of landfills. This will further incentivise  we are also working on future proposals to 
and increase funds available for waste  limit or ban some or all organic materials 
minimisation, including resource recovery  disposed to landfill, by 2030.
infrastructure
►  announced development of regulated 
product stewardship schemes for six 
priority products: plastic packaging, 
tyres, electrical and electronic products, 
agrichemicals and their containers, 
refrigerants and farm plastics. These 
schemes shift responsibility for a product’s 
lifecycle from communities and councils to 
producers and consumers. This will reduce 
emissions and support our wider circular 
economy objectives.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 53Fluorinated gases 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION What we are doing now
Existing initiatives include:
Aotearoa has net-zero emissions 
from refrigerants, while enabling   ►  ratifying the Kigali Amendment to the 
Montreal Protocol; 2020 was the first year 
the electrification of heating and 
of the phase-down of HFCs imported to 
access to heating and cooling for  
Aotearoa in bulk under this amendment
all New Zealanders.
►  making imports of F-gases subject to 
the NZ ETS. Also, goods and vehicles 
State of play 
containing HFCs or perfluorocarbons 
Fluorinated gases (F-gases) made up about   (PFCs) are subject to a levy. This is linked to 
2.5 per cent of total emissions in 2019.  the price of carbon and is updated annually 
F-gases are mainly used as refrigerants for  to reflect NZ ETS costs
heating and cooling, and are dominated  ►  a regulated product stewardship scheme 
by HFCs (92 per cent of F-gas emissions).  for refrigerants, which we are co-designing 
They are potent greenhouse gases, with  with industry. Producers and sellers may 
global warming potential (GWP) hundreds  be required to join an accredited scheme. 
or thousands of times greater than CO .  Manufacturers, importers, retailers and 
2
HFC refrigerants contribute a hugely  users would have to take responsibility 
disproportionate amount to global emissions.  for the emissions from refrigerants. The 
Ministry for the Environment will consult 
While HFCs are a small proportion of our  
on the regulations in 2022. 
total emissions, new technology could have  
a significant impact, including an estimated  
Together, these measures are expected to 
35 per cent reduction by 2035. 
result in a 31 per cent reduction in HFC 
emissions by 2035.
Key challenges
Refrigerants are vital for everyday 
Long-term strategy
refrigeration, heating and cooling systems. 
Emissions reductions from F-gases are led  
We will need to coordinate our move to 
by our commitments to the Kigali Amendment, 
sustainable heating and cooling technologies 
which requires the phase-down of bulk  
with other factors, including energy efficiency, 
HFC imports.
health and safety, and cold-chain stability.
We must promote good industry practice and 
go further than our commitments under the 
Kigali Amendment by:
►  implementing regulated product 
stewardship for refrigerants
►  considering further import controls.
54 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyAgriculture 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION If farmers had not improved efficiency, 
emissions would have increased by an 
Agricultural emissions are reduced, 
estimated 30–40 per cent since 1990. 
in line with the biogenic methane 
targets for 2030 and 2050. Key challenges
The Paris Agreement recognises the 
The sector supports the health of our 
importance of safeguarding food security and 
land, water and living systems, and  ending hunger. We must reduce agricultural 
produces nutritious food and high- emissions in a way that does not threaten 
food production and builds resilience to the 
quality natural fibres for domestic 
impacts of climate change. 
and international markets.
At present, there are limited options to reduce 
State of play biological emissions without significantly 
affecting production. These include on-
Aotearoa has a unique emissions profile for a 
farm practice change and land-use change. 
developed country. Emissions from agriculture 
Implementing existing mitigation practices 
make up 48 per cent of gross greenhouse gas 
requires behaviour change and upskilling 
emissions, the largest of any sector in the 
farmers and growers at a national scale. 
New Zealand Greenhouse Gas Inventory.  
Further investment in mitigation technologies, 
This reflects the economic importance of the 
such as methane inhibitors, vaccines and 
primary sector.
genetics, is needed to unlock more ambitious 
Of these agricultural emissions, over   emissions reductions. 
77 per cent are biogenic methane emitted 
The primary sector also provides a livelihood 
from livestock. We have adopted a split-gas 
for many rural and regional communities, as 
emissions reduction target to reflect the 
well as iwi and Māori who have significant 
different warming potential of short-lived 
investments in pastoral farming. A significant 
gases, such as methane, compared with long-
challenge will be to mitigate the potential 
lived gases, such as CO  and nitrous oxide. 
2 economic and social impacts of the climate 
Total agricultural emissions increased by   transition on farmers, businesses, iwi and 
17 per cent between 1990 and 2005, and  Māori, and rural communities.
have been relatively stable since then. 
Improvements in on-farm efficiency and 
productivity have lessened the impact 
of increasing emissions, even as overall 
production has grown. Greenhouse gas 
efficiency in farming has increased about  
1 per cent per annum over the past 25– 
30 years. 
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 55What we are doing now Through the GRA, Aotearoa helps developing 
regions to build capacity across many 
The He Waka Eke Noa – Primary Sector 
countries to measure and manage agricultural 
Climate Action Partnership is a partnership 
emissions. This initiative is one way we show 
between the Government, the primary sector 
global leadership in areas where we have 
and Māori to measure, manage and reduce 
specific expertise.
agricultural emissions. The Climate Change 
Response Act 2002 sets a series of milestones 
Long-term strategy
for this partnership, including implementing 
farm-level pricing for agricultural emissions  We will reduce agricultural emissions in line 
from 2025. The partnership also has pre-2025  with our climate targets. This will require 
milestones to help farmers know their total  widespread changes in farm practice, new 
annual emissions, and to have written farm  technologies and continued investment.  
plans to measure, manage and reduce these.  Such changes will involve:
Agricultural greenhouse gas research.   ►  pricing agricultural emissions to encourage 
The Government and industry have invested  farmers to reduce emissions
in research and development to improve  ►  investing in research and development to 
productivity and reduce emissions. Domestic  accelerate the availability of new mitigation 
research is supported through a range of  practices and technologies
programmes including the New Zealand 
►  expanding extension and advisory services 
Agricultural Greenhouse Gas Research Centre, 
to help farmers gain the knowledge and 
the Sustainable Food and Fibres Future  
resources they need to measure, manage 
fund, the Sustainable Land Management  
and reduce their emissions
and Climate Change research programme,  
the Greenhouse Gas Inventory Research   ►  enabling the transition to low-emissions 
land use.
Fund and the Pastoral Greenhouse Gas 
Research Consortium.
We will take a holistic approach to the 
Aotearoa champions international research  changes underway across the primary sector 
on agricultural emissions through the Global  to reduce our impact on the climate and 
Research Alliance on Agricultural Greenhouse  protect our waterways and biodiversity.  
Gases (GRA). The GRA has 65 member  We will maintain our reputation as one  
countries from all regions, involves over   of the world’s most sustainable providers  
3,000 scientists, and partners with global  of high-value fibres and nutritious food,  
organisations to find shared solutions to  while supporting the global shift to more 
reduce agricultural emissions.  sustainable production.
56 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyForestry and nature-
based solutions 
CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION State of play
Forests and forest products  Forests cover about one-third of Aotearoa. 
contribute to a more productive,  This includes over 8 million hectares of 
indigenous forest, of which around 2.5 million 
sustainable, inclusive and resilient 
hectares is on private land and around  
Aotearoa.
2.1 million hectares is exotic plantation forest. 
Forests offset gross emissions and  In 2019, forested land alone offset almost  
27 per cent of gross emissions.
provide products and bioenergy 
that displace emissions-intensive  Forests play a critical role in meeting our 
climate targets and provide a renewable 
alternatives. 
resource to support our transition to a low-
We have leading, sustainable forest  emissions economy. Forestry is an important 
economic sector and source of employment, 
practices and create innovative, 
and diverse forests enhance soil conservation, 
sought-after forest products. 
water quality and climate resilience. Our 
Native forests are at the heart of  native forests are central to maintaining and 
enhancing the native biodiversity of Aotearoa, 
work to preserve and promote 
and are of significant cultural and recreational 
indigenous biodiversity; they also 
value. They also have an important role in 
provide a long-term carbon sink. 
providing a long-term carbon sink.
Māori are empowered as kaitiaki 
For Māori, the land represents whakapapa 
(guardians) and lead innovation  
(genealogy) and heritage, and Māori have 
that meets their aspirations. significant interests in forests and forestry as 
kaitiaki, land and forest owners, and workers. 
Our goal is to empower Māori  
Māori are well positioned to contribute to and 
and all key stakeholders with the 
lead developments in forestry for production, 
skills, knowledge and resources   conservation and cultural purposes. The 
to ensure we maximise opportunities  Government has a commitment to partner 
with and protect Māori and iwi knowledge, 
to grow the role that forests  
interests, values and taonga under Te Tiriti  
and wood products play in our 
o Waitangi.
nation’s future.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 57We have recently entered a period of net  Other initiatives support the contribution  
afforestation, after nearly two decades of low  of forests and forest products to a range  
levels of afforestation and net deforestation.  of outcomes, including our climate targets.  
Government policy, including the NZ ETS and  In particular:
One Billion Trees Programme,16 has been a 
►  afforestation grants and incentives, 
major driver of this increase. 
such as those under the One Billion 
We need a considerable area of new forest to  Trees Programme, have helped drive 
meet our climate change targets, even with  afforestation and have wider benefits such 
significant reductions in gross emissions: the  as erosion control and Māori development
Climate Change Commission’s projections  ►  the Government is setting up a planning 
would see more than 1.2 million hectares of  and advisory service within Te Uru Rākau |  
new forests (exotic and native) from 2022   New Zealand Forest Service to support 
to 2050.  delivery on priorities for forests and  
forest products
A significant area of lower-productivity 
pastoral land has been identified as being  ►  a forestry and wood processing industry 
suitable for new afforestation. This includes  transformation plan is being developed 
about 1.5 million hectares that could be  and will investigate how to enhance 
suitable for planting production forestry and  forestry’s contribution to the bioeconomy. 
1.2 million hectares for new permanent forest,  It will consider options to provide a more 
due to steep, erosion-prone land. consistent supply of wood fibre and to 
attract investment in the production of 
What we are doing now
low-emissions wood products and biofuels
The NZ ETS is an important driver of 
►  the Aotearoa New Zealand Biodiversity 
afforestation, alongside environmental 
Strategy aims to promote and protect 
drivers, log prices and the availability of 
both biodiversity and the carbon stored in 
affordable land. Reforms have made it easier 
indigenous vegetation
to participate in the NZ ETS and improved 
incentives for afforestation, while recent  ►  the Fit for a Better World – Accelerating 
Our Economic Potential roadmap sets out 
changes to price controls (for 2022 to 2026) 
actions to transform the forestry sector 
provide for a new carbon price pathway to 
and refocus our tree-planting partnerships.
incentivise reductions in gross emissions. 
16  The One Billion Trees Programme, established in 2018, is a 10-year programme that aims to increase tree planting across Aotearoa. This is being 
achieved by replanting existing forests, establishing new forests through grants, joint ventures and partnerships, and making the recent changes to 
the NZ ETS to more strongly encourage afforestation. Funding for grants and joint ventures, which kickstarted the programme, has closed to new 
applications and the broader programme is continuing to keep us on track to meet the goal of establishing one billion trees by 2028.
58 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyWith rising carbon prices,17 a priority is 
to ensure NZ ETS settings support the 
sequestration needed to meet our targets 
without delaying emissions reductions in 
other sectors. 
We must also encourage the right amount, 
type and location of forests, to deliver the 
sequestration we need to meet our targets 
and support wider socio-economic and 
environmental outcomes.
Long-term strategy
We will:
►  balance forest sequestration with 
emissions reductions from other sectors, 
for a cost-effective, equitable and  
timely transition 
►  provide overarching strategic direction 
and policies that ensure forests and forest 
products support a range of outcomes, 
including biodiversity and sequestration 
►  work in close partnership with Māori and 
key stakeholders, including territorial 
authorities and land owners, to develop 
and implement forestry policies.
17  Under NZ ETS price control settings from 2022, the auction ‘price floor’ is at $30 and the cost containment reserve trigger is at a price of $70.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 59Equitable transition
Our low-emissions pathway includes steps to partner 
with Māori, protect the economy, communities 
and livelihoods, and share the benefits among all 
New Zealanders. CONTRIBUTION TO OUR LONG-TERM VISION  Long-term strategy
We have successfully moved to   We will:
a low-emissions and climate- ►  meet each of the emissions budgets 
resilient Aotearoa in a way that   through a coherent strategic package 
that comprises a mutually supportive and 
is fair and equitable and upholds  
balanced combination of emissions pricing, 
Te Tiriti o Waitangi.
well-targeted regulation, tailored sector 
policies and direct investment
State of play
►  enable an equitable transition for Māori 
The Climate Change Response Act 2002 
by upholding the principles of Te Tiriti, 
provides the framework for managing  
actively partnering with Māori on national 
the transition through a system of  
strategies, and embedding Māori values 
targets, emissions budgets and emissions 
and knowledge into our climate response. 
reduction plans. 
We will also support tangata whenua to 
Emissions reduction plans must include  decide on and implement their own actions
a strategy to mitigate the effects of the 
►  continue to build strong partnerships 
transition on employees and employers, 
with businesses, unions, workers, local 
regions, iwi and other Māori, and wider 
government and civil society to take  
communities, including funding for any 
action on climate change
mitigation action. 
►  help firms and households reduce their 
Committing to an equitable transition   emissions footprint, promote new business 
aligns with other government objectives,  and job opportunities, and support 
including building closer partnerships with  workers, households and communities 
Māori, future-proofing the economy and  through the transition.
protecting livelihoods. We are identifying 
where our plan will present the greatest 
challenges, and how we can assist 
communities, households and businesses  
to prepare for and manage the impacts of  
the transition. At the same time, we must  
take the opportunities that the transition 
brings, share the benefits and strengthen  
the social licence for the transition.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 61Next steps
We will publish the first three emissions budgets in  
May 2022. 
The remaining sections of the emissions reduction plan 
will also be published in May 2022. These will provide 
detailed information about the steps that Aotearoa will 
take to reduce emissions and increase its carbon sinks  
in the first budget period (2022–2025).
Consultation is underway to inform these policies, which 
will put us on the path to meet the next budgets and our 
long-term emissions goals.
62 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyGlossary 
2050 target Set in the Climate Change Response Act 2002, this target requires: 
► emissions of all greenhouse gases (except biogenic methane) to be net zero  
by 2050
► emissions of biogenic methane emissions to be 24–47 per cent below 2017 
levels by 2050 (and 10 per cent by 2030).
abatement  The reduction or removal of greenhouse gas emissions.
adaptation Actions to respond to the effects of a changing climate.
anthropogenic Originating in human activity.
Aotearoa A Māori name for New Zealand.
bioenergy Energy produced by living organisms.
biofuel Fuel produced from organic material – often plants or animal waste.
biogenic methane All methane emissions produced from the agriculture and waste sectors (as 
reported in the New Zealand Greenhouse Gas Inventory). 
carbon sequestration  Any reservoir that absorbs more carbon than it releases, thereby lowering the 
or carbon sink overall concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Examples include 
forests, vegetation, peatland and the ocean.
circular economy An economic system based on designing out waste and pollution, reusing 
products and materials, and regenerating natural systems.
Climate Change  A Crown entity that gives independent, expert advice to the Government on 
Commission climate change matters and monitors progress towards the Government’s 
mitigation and adaptation goals.
climate resilience The capacity of social, economic and environmental systems to cope with a 
hazardous event, effect, trend or disturbance caused by climate change, including 
by responding or reorganising in ways that maintain their essential function, 
identity and structure, while also maintaining the capacity for adaptation, 
learning and transformation.
CO Carbon dioxide. 
2
CO -e Carbon dioxide equivalent. Used to describe and compare different types of 
2
greenhouse gases, by comparing their warming potential to that of CO .
2
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 63decarbonise Reduce greenhouse gas emissions, for example, through the use of low-emissions 
power sources and electrification.
embodied emissions Emissions associated with the production of materials and construction 
processes throughout the lifespan of a building, including during construction, 
renovation, ongoing use and demolition. 
emissions Greenhouse gases released into the atmosphere, where they trap heat or radiation.
emissions budget The cumulative amount of greenhouse gases that can be emitted in New Zealand 
over five-year periods prescribed in the Climate Change Response Act 2002. 
Three successive emissions budgets must be in place at any given time.
emissions reduction  A plan that sets out the policies and strategies to meet emissions budgets by 
plan reducing emissions and increasing removals. A new emissions reduction plan 
must be in place before the beginning of each emissions budget period.
EV  Electric vehicle.
F-gases Fluorinated gases; mainly used as refrigerants for heating and cooling.
fossil fuels Natural fuels formed in the geological past from the remains of living organisms, 
for example, coal and natural gas. When used as fuel, these emit greenhouse gases.
greenhouse gases Atmospheric gases that trap or absorb heat and contribute to climate change. 
The gases covered by the Climate Change Response Act 2002 are carbon 
dioxide (CO ), methane (CH ), nitrous oxide (N O), hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), 
2 4 2
perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF ).
6
gross emissions New Zealand’s total emissions from agriculture, energy, industrial processes 
and product use (IPPU) and waste sectors as reported in the reports required 
under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the Kyoto 
Protocol, and the Paris Agreement. While Tokelau’s gross emissions are also 
included in the New Zealand Greenhouse Gas Inventory, they are not included 
for the purposes of emissions budgets or emissions reduction plans.
hapū Kinship group, clan, subtribe.
hydrofluorocarbons  A category of human-made greenhouse gases often used in refrigeration, air 
(HFCs) conditioning and other processes. 
iwi Tribe, large group descended from a common ancestor.
64 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategykaitiaki or  Guardian or guardianship, stewardship, for example, of natural resources.
kaitiakitanga
linear economy The predominant economic system globally, following the model of ‘take-make-
use-dispose. 
low-emissions,   An economic and social system that has moved away from the use of fossil fuels 
low-carbon and adopted low-emissions energy sources and processes, and consequently 
produces minimal greenhouse gas emissions. 
mātauranga Māori Māori knowledge systems and worldviews, including traditional concepts.
mitigation Human actions to reduce emissions by sources or enhance removals by sinks of 
greenhouse gases. Examples of reducing emissions by sources include walking 
instead of driving, or replacing a coal boiler with a renewable electric-powered 
one. Examples of enhancing removals by sinks include growing new trees to 
absorb carbon, or industrial carbon capture and storage activities.
Mt CO -e Metric tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent.
2
NDC Nationally determined contribution. Each Party to the Paris Agreement must 
define its contribution to the long-term temperature goals set out in the 
agreement, in the form of an NDC. 
net emissions Net emissions are made up of gross emissions combined with emissions and 
removals from the land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector, 
as reported in the reports required under the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change, the Kyoto Protocol, and the Paris Agreement. For 
the purposes of emissions budgets and emissions reduction plans, this excludes 
Tokelau’s emissions.
net zero A target of completely negating the greenhouse gas emissions produced by 
human activity. This can be done by balancing emissions and removals or by 
eliminating the production of emissions in the first place.
NZ ETS New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme.
offshore mitigation Emissions reductions and removals that occur outside New Zealand, or overseas-
based incentives to reduce or remove emissions (for example, by the pricing of 
emissions through participation in an overseas emissions trading scheme). 
operational emissions Emissions from operating a building.
Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 65organic waste Wastes containing carbon compounds that are capable of being readily 
biologically degraded, including by natural processes, such as paper, food 
residuals, wood wastes, garden and, plant wastes, but not inorganic materials 
such as metals and glass or plastic. These, and excluding hazardous substances. 
Organic wastes can be decomposed by microorganisms into methane, carbon 
dioxide, nitrous oxide, and simple organic molecules (plastic contains carbon 
compounds and is theoretically organic in nature, but generally is not readily 
biodegradable).
Paris Agreement A legally binding international treaty on climate change mitigation, adaptation 
and finance, adopted by 196 Parties in Paris and signed in 2016. One of the goals 
of the Paris Agreement is “holding the increase in global average temperature 
to 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature 
increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels”.
perfluorocarbons  These are organofluorine compounds containing only carbon and fluorine. Some 
(PFCs)  of them are potent greenhouse gases.
product stewardship A scheme in which a producer, importer, retailer or consumer takes responsibility 
for reducing a product’s environmental impact.
tangata whenua  The people of the land, local indigenous people. Māori are tangata whenua. 
taonga Treasure, anything prized – applied to anything considered to be of value, 
including socially or culturally valuable objects, resources, phenomenon, ideas 
and techniques.
Te ao Māori The Māori world.
Te Tiriti o Waitangi   The Treaty of Waitangi. Note: While these terms are used interchangeably, we 
or Te Tiriti acknowledge that the English version and te reo Māori translation are separate 
documents and differ in a number of respects.
transition The shift to a low-emissions, sustainable economy and way of life.
whānau Extended family, family group.
Zero Carbon  Introduced by amendments to the Climate Change Response Act 2002 in 2019, 
Framework this is a legislative framework to enable the transition to a low-emissions and 
climate-resilient Aotearoa. This includes a statutory 2050 target, provision for 
emissions budgets and emissions reduction plans, together with national climate 
change risks assessments and national adaptation plans.
66 Aotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategyAotearoa New Zealand's long-term low-emissions development strategy 67