GOVERNMENT OF TONGA
LOW EMISSION 
DEVELOPMENT 
STRATEGY
2021-2050
NOVEMBER 2021FOREWORD
As a series of low lying islands the Kingdom of Tonga is particularly 
vulnerable to the effects of climate change, and with a population of just over 
100,000 people our greenhouse gas emissions are negligible compared to 
larger, more developed economies. 
Nonetheless, Tonga is demonstrating strong ambition and leadership by 
communicating a long-term, low emission development strategy (LT-LEDS) 
that not only considers mitigation but also resilience and adaptation, as well 
the country’s broader development objectives. 
This LT-LEDS reaffirms Tonga’s commitments to the Paris Agreement 
which Tonga ratified on the 21st September 2016. It also complements the 
Government of Tonga’s adaptation and mitigation efforts as articulated 
in Tonga’s Climate Change Policy, Tonga’s Joint National Action Plan 2 
on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management and Tonga’s Second 
Nationally Determined Contribution to the Paris Agreement.
By developing Tonga’s Second Nationally Determined Contribution and 
LT-LEDS in unison, Tonga has already demonstrated visionary thinking and 
planning that will support alignment between the long-term vision and 
pathways, and planning and investments in the nearer term. LT-LEDS was 
developed in a participatory manner, grounded in our culture and values. 
Drawing on Talanga, an ‘interactive dialogue or interactive talking with a 
purpose’ between two individuals or groups or communities, the process and 
workshops wove together principles of traditional culture and knowledge, 
family, community and religion, autonomy and independence. 
As a result, the LT-LEDS vision is well aligned to 
Tonga Strategic Development Framework 2015 -2025 
(TSDF II): A low emissions Tonga, where all sectors 
work together to create resilience, autonomy and 
self-reliance. 
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the team from the Department 
of Climate Change, MEIDECC for their efforts in developing Tonga’s LT-LEDS 
and to all national and international stakeholders who have contributed to its 
development. 
As the Minister for the Ministry of Meteorology, Energy, Information, 
Disaster Management, Environment, Climate Change and Communications 
(MEIDECC), it is indeed an honour and a privilege to submit Tonga’s Low 
Emission Development Strategy 2021-2050 to the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Honourable Poasi Mataele Tei
Image: Port of Refuge (Taulanga Puatalefusi) as 
viewed from Mt. Talau, Vava’u. Taken in 2020.
2 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 3CONTENTS
Acknowledgments 6 4 MAJOR FIRST STEPS 86
Acronyms  8 LT-LEDS first steps 87
Executive summary 10 Cross-sectoral measures 94
Tonga LT-LEDS 2021-2050 at a glance 12
5 CLIMATE RESILIENCE & ADAPTATION 96
5.1 National context: climate change impacts in Tonga 97
1 NATIONAL CONTEXT 14
1.1 Country profile 15 5.2 Existing policies frameworks and commitment to   98
climate adaptation
1.2 GHG emissions profile 16
5.3 Synergies between mitigation and adaptation identified  100
1.3  Narrative description of relevant legal and institutional frameworks 17 throughout the stakeholders consultation process
1.4 Why a LT-LEDS for Tonga? 20
1.5 Process, principles, and macrotrends 21
6 GOVERNANCE, MONITORING & REVIEW 104
2 COMMITMENT STATEMENT 24 Reference list 108
2.1 The vision 25 Annex A. Consultation list 110
2.2 Sector visions 25 Annex B. Process governance 114
Annex C. Relevant legislation and policy 115
3 Key short, medium and long term climate actions 26
3.1 Introduction 27
3.2 Energy 28
3.3 Transport 38
3.4 AFOLU 52
3.5 Waste 66
3.6 Human Settlements 76
4 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 5ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The Government of Tonga would like to acknowledge and thank the New 
Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade (MFAT) for their kind and 
generous support in the development of our LT-LEDS. The development 
of this LT-LEDS has been led by the Department of Climate Change (DCC) 
under the Ministry of Meteorology, Energy, Information, Disaster Management, 
Environment, Climate Change and Communications (MEIDECC), with 
technical assistance provided by ClimateWorks Australia, Global Green 
Growth Institute and Relative Creative, and on the ground support from a 
team of invaluable facilitators and national experts. DCC and the consulting 
team extend their warm and heartfelt gratitude to members of the Joint 
National Action Plan on Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management 
(JNAP) Technical Team and Technical Working Groups, and all workshop 
participants and stakeholders consulted throughout the process. Malo ‘aupito. 
List of Figures
Figure 1. Estimated greenhouse gas emissions by sector (2006)  16
Figure 2. Proposal for harmonized revision cycles of Tonga’s NDCs and LT-LEDS  106
Figure 3. Institutional Arrangements for LT-LEDS Development  114
Cataloguing Data
This publication (and any material sourced from it) 
should be attributed as:
Government of Tonga. 2021, Tonga Low Emission 
Development Strategy 2021-2050, Nuku’alofa, Tonga
Document Design
Relative Creative
Image Credits
Front & back cover image: Aerial view of Nuku’alofa, 
Tongatapu. Taken in 2021.
All images are credited to the Mitigation Division, 
Department of Climate Change, Tonga.
Image (opposite page): Women laying 
out ngatu at a local residence in Fasi, 
Tongatapu. Taken in 2020.
6 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050Acronyms
ADB Asian Development Bank MORC Ministry of Revenue and Customs
AFOLU Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use MOT Ministry of Tourism
AGC Agricultural Growth Committee  MPAs Marine Protected Areas
BAU Business as Usual MPD Marine Ports Division
CAD Civil Aviation Division MTED Ministry of Trade and Economic Development
CBOs Community Based Organisations  NCCCC National Climate Change Coordination Committee 
CDPs Community Development Plans  NDC Nationally Determined Contribution
COP UNFCCC Conference of Parties  NEMO National Emergency Management Office
CSO Civil Society Organisation NGHGI National Greenhouse Gas Inventory 
DCC Department of Climate Change NGOs Non-Government Organisations
DOE Department of Energy NIIP II National Infrastructure Investment Plan 2, 2013-2023
E&S Environmental and Social  NIIP-3 Tonga National Infrastructure Investment Plan 2020-2030 
EAP Education Awareness Plan  NSPAO National Spatial Planning Agency Office 
EE Energy Efficiency  PAT Ports Authority Tonga
EEZ  Exclusive Economic Zone  PMO Prime Minister’s Office 
EU European Union RE Renewable Energy
EVs Electric Vehicles  SCADA  Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
FAO Food and Agricultural Organisation SDG Sustainable Development Goal 
FBO Faith-based Organisation SMAs Special Management Areas 
Forest Management Plan (Management Plan for the Forests and Tree  SOE State-owned enterprise
FMP
Resources of Tonga)
SPREP Secretariat of the Regional Environment Programme
GCF Green Climate Fund
TASF Tonga Agriculture Sector Plan 2016-2020
GDP Gross Domestic Product
TC Tropical Cyclone 
Gg Gigagram 
TCCP Tonga Climate Change Policy (2016)
GHG Greenhouse Gas 
TEEMP Tonga Energy Efficiency Masterplan 
GoT Government of Tonga
TERM Tonga Energy Road Map 
ICT Information and Communications Technology
TERMPLUS Tonga Energy Road Map, 2021 - 2035 
IPCC Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
TNC Third National Communication (2019)
Joint National Action Plan 2 on Climate Change & Disaster Risk 
JNAP2 TNFP Tonga National Forest Policy 2009
Management 2018-2028
TMPI Tonga Maritime Polytechnic Institute
Japanese Technical Cooperation Project for Promotion of Regional Initiative 
J-PRISM II
on Solid Waste Management, Phase II  TPL Tonga Power Limited
LED Light Emitting Diode  TSD Tonga Statistics Department
LT-LEDS Long-term, low-emission development strategy TSDF II Tonga Strategic Development Framework 2015-2025
MAFF Ministry of Agriculture, Food, & Forests TVET Technical and Vocational Education and Training 
Meteorology, Energy, Information, Disaster Management, Environment,  UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
MEIDECC
Climate Change and Communications 
UNCTCN United Nations Climate Technology Centre and Network
MFAT New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade
WAL Waste Authority Limited 
MIA Ministry of Internal Affairs
MLNR Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources 
MOF Ministry of Finance 
MOI Ministry of Infrastructure 
8 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 9EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  •  Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use 
Change (IPCC) Working Group I Sixth  (AFOLU) and Fisheries: A resilient Fisheries 
Assessment Report (2021) shows that the  and Agriculture, Forestry and Land Use 
world will probably reach or exceed 1.5 degrees  Tonga through low emissions, low costs and 
Celsius of warming within the next two  sustainable systems.
decades. Tonga is already experiencing the  •  Waste: A resilient, sustainable and educated 
impacts of climate change and this warming  Tonga, achieved through effective education 
world, including increased intensity of climate  and sustainable waste management.
and weather extremes. An international 
•  Human Settlements: Building a resilient and 
solution is needed to address this international 
autonomous Tonga through transformation 
challenge. While respecting common but 
and strengthening of all sectors.
differentiated responsibility and respective 
capabilities, the Kingdom of Tonga will play its  These sector pathways, their related actions 
part in supporting the reduction of Greenhouse  and steps were guided by seven principles 
Gas (GHG) emissions in support of the long- important to the Tongan people: For the  A low 
term temperature goal of the Paris Agreement.  purposes of the LT-LEDS, these were defined 
by stakeholders as environment, inclusivity, 
The Government of Tonga puts forth a long-
autonomy, culture, traditional knowledge, 
term low-emission development strategy (LT-
education and core values.
LEDS) that aspires to: A low emissions Tonga,  emissions 
where all sectors work together to create  The implementation of the LT-LEDS, its sector 
resilience, autonomy and self-reliance. pathways and actions will start straight away 
with the initiation of nine first steps that will 
This will require concerted and comprehensive 
advance Tonga towards its vision. In doing so, 
efforts from all facets of society: government,  Tonga, where 
climate-resilience and adaptation co-benefits 
public enterprise, private sector, and civil 
will be integrated with pathways, actions and 
society. Tonga will also continue to work 
steps. 
actively in international forums to strengthen 
consensus among countries to tackle  Finally, Tonga is committed to coordinating  all sectors 
climate change, and collaborate actively with  processes for its LT-LEDS and future NDCs, 
international partners to build capabilities and  with the aim of creating alignment between 
share experiences.  long- and short-term actions. This will 
avoid duplication of efforts and allow for 
Tonga will pursue the sectoral pathways and  work together 
regular exchange of information between 
actions outlined in this document, while also 
the two documents. Alignment will occur 
pursuing climate-resilience and adaptation 
under institutional arrangements, systems 
efforts. In addition to the stated vision, Tonga’s 
for monitoring and assessing progress, and 
LT-LEDS is guided by 5 sector pathways, each 
revisions or review cycles.  to create 
with a series of actions:
While Tonga’s efforts alone may seem modest, 
•  Energy: A Tonga that promotes standards 
efforts in delivering this LT-LEDS will be 
that establish renewable energy, energy 
substantial and demonstrate leadership in 
efficient infrastructure and battery storage  helping to achieve a long-term, low-carbon  resilience, 
facilities.
future for all. 
•  Transport: A Tonga with low emissions 
in the Transport sector, achieved through 
sustainable maintenance of transport, 
autonomy and 
knowledge production, enforced regulation 
and decentralisation of services.
self-reliance.
10 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 11VISIONS   ACTIONS   Major first steps  
FOR Long-term sector  FOR Long-term sector  TO ADVANCE TONGA’S LOW EMISSIONS FUTURE
pathways to low emissions pathways to low emissions
Loan program for 
low energy buildings
2021-2050
ENERGY • 100% renewable electricity by 2035
• High standards for technologies, 
A Tonga that promotes standards 
infrastructure & retrofitting
that establish renewable energy, 
• Education to support jobs in energy
A demonstrated commitment TO  energy efficient infrastructure, & 
• Private sector fund RE projects
battery storage facilities.  Standardising lighting power 
achieving a resilient Tonga by 2035 • Upgrades to electricty grids
consumption for buildings by 2025
AUTONOMY ENVIRONMENT
TCCP  TNC  
TSDF II JNAP2
2016 2019
Low emission vehicles: 
TRANSPORT • GHG emissions reduced 28% by 2030
• Improve data collection & waste management government to pilot 
A Tonga with low emissions in the 
The Tonga 2050 VISION
• Strengthened road & vehicle maintenance electric vehicles
Transport sector, achieved through 
• 100% EV government fleet & 50% long-term 
A low emissions Tonga,  sustainable maintenance of transport, 
public adoption
knowledge production, enforced 
• Expansion of non-motorised & cycling transport
where all sectors   regulation & decentralisation of services.
Develop a waste  
work together to  
communication strategy
create resilience,  INCLUSIVITY
CORE VALUES
autonomy &  
AFOLU • Strengthen public-private partnerships
self-reliance.
• Data collection, management & accessibility
A resilient Fisheries & Agriculture, 
• Expansion of MPAs & SMAs Strengthen existing transport policies
Forestry & Land Use Tonga through 
DRIVEN BY low emissions, low costs &   • Enhancing agro-forestry & home gardening
Traditional  Health & wellbeing   Education Communities,  sustainable systems.
knowledge   of all Tongans   individuals & 
& culture  (& every  government 
Mainstreaming important low 
household) push for change
emission policy elements into 
CULTURE
relevant ministries
WASTE • Develop & implement national waste strategy
KEY NDC TARGETS
• Improve waste infrastructure & management
A resilient, sustainable & educated 
• Education, awareness raising, traditional 
Tonga, achieved through effective 
knowledge & use of local/recycled goods Promote best practices in 
reduction in GHG emissions by 2030  education & sustainable waste 
13% • Establish biogas plant by 2030
compared to 2006 through 70%  management. agriculture, forestry and fisheries 
renewable electricity
Establishment of a forest  Expansion of the formal TRADITIONAL 
inventory & planting KNOWLEDGE
waste 
Develop and implement a 
one 
  collection  national waste policy for Tonga
HUMAN SETTLEMENTS • Community access to climate resilient 
million  system Building a resilient & autonomous  infrastructure
• Enhance stormwater management, 
Tonga through transformation & 
water security & coastal protection
trees
strengthening of all sectors.
• Improve resilience of housing
Pedestrianising 
by 2023 • Promote sustainable tourism
Nuku’alofa by 2022
EDUCATION
Synergies between mitigation & adaptation ACROSS SECTORS
Improve productivity &  Expansion of MPAs & SMAs Reforestation as part of  Enhance home gardening Co-benefits of energy  Impacts of EV uptake on  Reduced waste production  Resilient community 
diversity of agroforestry promoting best practices  interventions transport & waste & sustainable waste  infrastructure in human 
 in agroforestry   disposal settlements across TongaNATIONAL 
1
1.1  Country profile
CONTEXT
The Kingdom of Tonga is an archipelago located in the South Pacific Ocean with a total land area 
of 718km2, consisting of four main island groups: Tongatapu, Ha‘apai, Vava‘u and the two Niuas. 
Nuku‘alofa is the capital of Tonga, which is located on the main island of Tongatapu. 
Climate Economy
Tonga’s climate is tropical, with two distinct  Tonga is a small, open economy, with a 
seasons: dry season (May-October) and wet  Gross Domestic Product (GDP) estimated 
season (November-April). The mean annual  at USD 512 million in 2019 (World Bank, 
temperature in Tonga varies from 23°C to  2021). It has a strong position as a lower 
26°C. Climate in Tonga is governed by a  middle-income country, in part due to its 
number of factors which include the trade  high migration and remittance culture, which 
winds and the movement of the South Pacific  represent approximately 50–60% of gross 
Convergence Zone. Year-to-year variability in  national domestic income (Tonga Statistics 
climate is also strongly influenced by the El  Department, 2016). In 2019, remittances from 
Niño Southern Oscillation, which can bring  Tonga’s diaspora contributed USD 193.6 million 
prolonged drought conditions and tropical  or 37% of GDP (World Bank, 2021). 
cyclones that occur during the wet season.
Tonga’s largest export sectors are tourism, 
Tonga faces near and long-term exposure to  agriculture and fisheries. In 2015–16 the 
the negative impacts of climate change and  service sector contribution to GDP (including 
natural disasters. Tonga was ranked the second  tourism trade, and hospitality) was 54.5%, 
highest disaster risk country globally, according  while agriculture contributed 14.7% to GDP in 
to the World Risk Report in 2020 (Bündnis  current prices (Census 2016).  
Entwicklung Hilft, 2020). Impacts include 
Tonga’s productive sectors are vulnerable 
seismic activity with earthquakes and tsunamis; 
to the impacts of climate change. Intense 
frequent tropical cyclones with damaging 
cyclones, as experienced in Tropical Cyclone 
winds (often between 22-65 knots), rain and 
(TC) Gita and TC Harold, substantially impact 
storm surges; droughts, and sea level rise.
these sectors and the economy. In April 
Population 2020, TC Harold is estimated to have caused 
economic damage totalling 12% of GDP 
The total population of Tonga is approximately 
(World Bank, 2020), in addition to lives and 
100,651 people as of 2016, split into 50,255 
livelihoods lost.  
males and 50,396 females (Tonga Statistics 
Department, 2016). More updated population  COVID-19
figures will come through the planned 
The government of Tonga has successfully 
November 2021 Census. According to the 2016 
quarantined its population from COVID-19, 
census, the majority of this population (74%) 
with no cases recorded as of August 2021. 
lives on Tongatapu with population density 
However, the pandemic continues to threaten 
being 286 people per km2 compared to only 17 
Tonga’s population, health and economic 
people per km2 in the Niuas. 
fortunes. The recovery of Tonga’s tourism 
sector, a substantial contributor to the 
economy before COVID-19, will be protracted 
as a consequence of border closures. Despite 
these challenges and uncertainties, Tonga 
continues to demonstrate ambitious mitigation 
commitments and action. 
Image (opposite page): The tourist hotspot Friends Cafe and 
Tourist Center (white with red roof wooden building) on the main 
street of Taufaáhau Road in downtown Nuku’alofa, Tongatapu. 
Taken in 2021.
TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 15
1 NATIONAL CONTEXT1.2  GHG Emissions Profile  1.3  Narrative description 
of relevant legal and 
Tonga emitted 310.4 Gigagrams  The Second NDC acknowledges the 
(Gg) of CO -equivalent in 2006,  challenges that data accessibility and 
2 institutional frameworks
according to the Third National  quality bring to Tonga’s recording 
Communication submitted in 2019.  and reporting of emissions. In 
Nearly all emissions are derived  particular, uncertainty in land use 
The Government of Tonga is a global leader in developing a suite of policies 
from the Energy sector (39%)  data, combined with paucity of 
and plans that integrate climate change and sustainable development. 
and AFOLU (61%), with waste  information regarding assumptions 
accounting for 0.3% of total GHG  and methodologies used to  The LT-LEDS is no different; drawing on and aligning with the following key 
emissions. While energy emissions  calculate GHG emissions and carbon  executive and legislative mandates, laws, and publications2:  
are mostly driven by a dependency  sequestration from living biomass, 
Tonga Strategic Development Framework 2015-2025 (TSDF II) provides 
on imported petroleum for electricity  undermines the reliability of the 
an overarching framework for Tonga’s development including the LT-LEDS. 
generation and transportation,  estimate for the AFOLU sector.
It seeks ‘A more progressive Tonga supporting a higher quality of life for all’ 
the increase in AFOLU emissions 
This LT-LEDS is organised into  through seven national outcomes: knowledge-based economy; balanced 
is a result of the steady growth in 
Tonga’s key GHG emitting sectors:  urban and rural development across island groups; empowering human 
commercial forest harvesting and 
AFOLU, Energy, Transport, Waste  development with gender equality; responsive good-governance with law and 
wood utilisation, increased clearance 
and Human Settlements. Transport  order; successful provision and maintenance of infrastructure and technology; 
of forested land and grasslands for 
has been identified as its own sector,  effective land administration, environment management, and resilience 
commercial farming, and increased 
with a focus on land transport as  to climate and risk; and consistent advancement of our external interests, 
clearance of secondary growth for 
the largest emission sub-sector  security and sovereignty.  
social uses especially firewood, 
for transport, within data currently 
wood carving and construction. 
available. Human Settlements was  Tonga Climate Change Policy (TCCP, 2016) intends to make Tonga climate-
The 2006 emissions represent an 
selected as a cross-cutting sector  resilient by 2035 and enhance mitigation efforts. Its vision is for ‘A Tonga 
increase of 21.56 percent from GHG 
with significant contributions to GHG  that is resilient to the impacts of climate change and climate-related disaster 
emissions of 2000, as reported in 
emissions and broader development  risks, and is able to protect and safeguard its present and future citizens.’ It 
the Second National Communication. 
objectives. seeks to achieve this through three strategic goals: strengthened integrated 
Nonetheless, Tonga accounts for 
risk management to enhance climate and disaster resilience; low carbon 
just 0.0037 percent of global CO  
2 development; and strengthened disaster preparedness, response and 
emissions.
recovery specific targets.
Figure 1. Estimated greenhouse gas emissions by sector (2006)1
Joint National Action Plan 2 Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management 
(JNAP2) 2018-2028 provides the strategic action plan for both the 
GHG Emissions (in Gg) Share in total GHG emissions TSDF II and TCCP. Its mission is ‘To develop a resilient Tonga through an 
Energy 120.4 39% inclusive, participatory approach that is based on good governance, builds 
knowledgeable, proactive communications and supports a strong, sustainable 
Agriculture 1.8 0.6%
development pathway.’ Its guiding principles were replicated in the LT-LEDS 
LULUCF 187.4 60% process, including ‘A holistic, multi-faceted, multi-sectoral approach’ and 
an ‘Integrated approach to adaptation and mitigation’. The JNAP Technical 
Waste 0.9 0.3%
Working Groups provided oversight to the LT-LEDS process (see Annex B for 
TOTAL 310.2 100% more detail). 
Waste 0.3%
Source: Government of Tonga (2019)
Third National Communication on Climate Change Report (TNC, 2019) 
updates the information and inventory of Tonga’s Second National 
Communication. It captures Tonga’s national circumstances and National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventory (NGHGI), provides mitigation analysis, vulnerability 
and adaptation assessments, and details constraints, gaps, financial, technical 
Energy 39%
and capacity needs.  
LULUCF 60%
Agriculture 0.6%
1  The Government of Tonga’s Third National Communication to the UNFCCC distinguishes between  2  This document acknowledges that at time of publication a number of new legislations had just been 
(1) agriculture and (2) land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) as separate sectors for GHG  approved including the Disaster Risk Management Bill 2021; Tonga Climate Change Fund Bill 2021 and 
emissions (Government of Tonga, 2019) Tonga Energy Bill 2021
16 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 17
1 NATIONAL CONTEXT 1 NATIONAL CONTEXTTonga’s Second National Determined Contribution (NDC, 2020) is ambitious 
and reflects the urgency of the Paris Agreement, with mitigation targets 
for Energy (a 13% (16 Gg) reduction in GHG emissions by 2030 compared 
to 2006), AFOLU (establishment of a forest inventory and planting one 
million trees by 2023) and Waste (expansion of the formal waste collection 
system). Tonga’s Second NDC sought alignment with the LT-LEDS, with the 
recommendations and commitments of the former being included in the 
sector pathways development. Many of the stakeholders who participated in 
the 2015 NDC Review and Second NDC Validation were actively engaged in 
the workshops under the LT-LEDS. 
Tonga has a goal of Gender Equity by 2025 and the Government recognises 
that sustainable development can only be achieved if gender considerations 
(i.e. the respective issues, concerns, and priorities of women and men) are 
factored into the work of the government. This approach is espoused in the 
TSDF II, of which the third National Outcome envisions ‘a more inclusive, 
sustainable and empowering human development with gender equality’. 
Further, the National Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality 
Tonga Policy and Strategic Plan of Action 2019–2025 includes specific 
national priorities to address gender issues that the Government and 
national stakeholders have agreed require urgent attention. Two of these 
priorities are particularly relevant for the LT-LEDS: ‘Enabling environment for 
mainstreaming gender across government policies, programmes, services, 
corporate budgeting and monitoring and evaluation’; and ‘Equitable access to 
economic assets and employment’.
Image (opposite page): Churchgoers after a church 
service at the Immaculate Heart of Mary Cathedral, 
Ma’ufanga, Tongatapu. Taken in 2019.
18 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050
1 NATIONAL CONTEXT1.4 Why a LT-LEDS for  1.5  Process, Principles, and 
Tonga?   Macrotrends
Purpose Process
Developing a LT-LEDS achieves multiple purposes for  Tonga’s LT-LEDS was developed through a series of facilitated strategic 
Tonga: dialogues with key Tongan stakeholders, supported by technical expertise 
and analysis. This participatory process was designed to reflect Tonga’s 
Fulfilling commitments under the Paris Agreement 
culture of Talanga, an ‘interactive dialogue or interactive talking with a 
which under Article 4, paragraph 19, states that ‘All 
purpose’ between two individuals or groups or communities. Cultural 
Parties should strive to formulate and communicate 
metaphors and motifs were also used throughout to act as visual storytelling 
long-term low greenhouse gas emission development 
aids and carry dialogue activities. These dialogues took place over three 
strategies, mindful of Article 2 taking into account 
workshops:
their common but differentiated responsibilities and 
respective capabilities, in the light of different national  •  Window Workshop 1 (October 2020) focused on exploring Tonga’s 
circumstances.’ The related COP Decision 1/CP 21,  past, present, and future, considering global and regional macrotrends 
paragraph 35, ‘invites’ Parties to communicate by  and possible implications for Tonga. The result was three main visions 
2020, to the secretariat, ‘mid-century’ long-term low  that represent recurring themes of education and training, autonomy 
greenhouse gas emission development strategies in  and independence, resilience & self-reliance and returning to tradition.
accordance with Article 4, paragraph 19.
•  Window Workshop 2 (February 2021) focused on iterating the visions 
Support and complement existing planning and  from Workshop 1. Stakeholders outlined preferred pathways for each 
policy processes by bringing a longer term, more  sector, identifying actions needed to achieve each vision and mapped 
integrated view. This will result in improved socio- these actions to different scales of change (village/ community, 
economic outcomes and contribute to meeting  government/business, and global) and timelines (2025, 2030 and 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Tonga has  2050).
already demonstrated visionary thinking and successful 
•  Window Workshop 3 (July 2021) focused on converging on and 
planning to identify low-carbon development, adaptation, 
confirming a single shared vision. Based on this, stakeholders finalised 
mitigation and climate resilience actions and policies 
sector pathways with priority intervention actions and outlined 
that simultaneously deliver socio-economic benefits in 
major first-step actions which would support implementation of the 
line with national priorities (see Section 1.3 for relevant 
intervention actions identified.
policies).
The participatory design also enabled the LT-LEDS process to overcome 
Enhance dialogue and governance capability. By 
challenges around access to strong quantitative data, particularly GHG 
strengthening and extending existing processes of 
emissions data (see section 1.2). The workshops provided decision-makers 
dialogue and governance, particularly those established 
with qualitative information and took them through multiple rounds of 
for the JNAP2, Tonga can further enhance its capability 
divergent thinking (open, creative, playful, non-judgmental) to create 
for strategic planning in areas of infrastructure, social, 
choices and convergent thinking (analytical, decisive, and strategic) to refine 
economic and environmental development.
those choices. This was informed by qualitative knowledge gathered from 
Provide a framework for more integrated and strategic  numerous sources: government policies and plans, external reports, additional 
investment and development aid coordination, towards  technical analysis by the consulting team and sense checking with the local 
a more resource-efficient, secure and resilient Tonga.   steering committee and technical experts. 
The LT-LEDS provides an opportunity for the Tongan 
Workshops included participants from all government ministries, public 
government to coordinate strategically with development 
enterprise, private sector and civil society (see full Consultation list in Annex 
partners on the transformational investments needed to 
A). By maintaining a broad scope (beyond just low-carbon development), 
mitigate GHG emissions and adapt to climate change. 
decision makers were encouraged to consider trade-offs, benefits and 
sequencing of Tonga’s future pathways. The process intended to strengthen 
Images: Mapping activities undertaken by  and extend existing processes of dialogue and governance so that Tonga can 
stakeholders in participatory design workshops.
further enhance its capability for long-term, strategic planning.
For more 
Due to time and resource constraints, the following elements were deemed  information on 
out of scope for the process: a quantified long-term emissions reduction  methodology 
target, quantified financial needs for proposed interventions, international  and governance 
cooperation needed to implement the LT-LEDS.  see Annex B.
20 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 21
1 NATIONAL CONTEXT 1 NATIONAL CONTEXTPrinciples and Macrotrends 
The LT-LEDS process was informed by a number of guiding  Concurrently, stakeholders considered macrotrends that may influence 
principles, macrotrends and elements.  Tonga’s futures. These trends were grouped into economy, society, 
environment, politics and technology. Economic and societal macrotrends 
Cross-cutting development objectives and principles for Tonga are 
were equally high priorities for stakeholders. Examples include:
expressed in several existing documents including the TSDF II, the 
TCCP, the JNAP2 and the Tonga Energy Road Map (TERM). From  •  Climate migration:  
these documents, seven principles were identified and used by  ‘In the future, Tonga will experience increases in average temperatures 
stakeholders throughout Workshops 1, 2 and 3:  which will result in a rise in the number of hot days and warm nights 
and a decline in cooler weather. This may drive more and more 
Tongans to migrate in search of livelihoods and more comfortable 
living conditions’.
Environment •  Remittances:  
Sustainable environmental development. ‘An important source of income for most Tongans, the Governor of 
Tonga’s Reserve Bank cautions that remittances have been on the 
decline since the 2007-08 global financial crisis. Remittance may not 
be a sustainable form of investment for Tonga and the government 
Inclusivity 
needs to consider alternatives to generate local income and 
With participatory & inclusive governance and  consumption’.
empowered communities.
•  Health:  
‘Changing diets, the decline in fresh fish consumption and increase in 
intake of imported canned foods is directly linked to high rates of non-
Traditional Knowledge  communicable diseases in Tonga’.
Valuing Tongan traditional culture and knowledge.
As part of the visioning process, stakeholders were asked to consider the 
following elements as they thought about ways forward: 
Culture
Technical: Technical solutions and interventions.
Valuing community, family and religion.
Policy: Key policy and institutional changes.
Autonomy Workforce: Future workforce needs and education strategies.
Technical and 
With a resilient economy and reduced reliance on 
Workforce were 
Investments: Key investments needed to start Tonga moving on 
imported energy. most commonly 
agreed pathways in the short to medium term.
identified among 
stakeholders as 
Financing: Approaches to financing including working 
critical elements, 
Education
with development partners, and enhancing private sector 
followed by 
Quality education for all Tongan’s, guided by the   participation where feasible. financing.
latest science.
Core Values
Of sharing, cooperating and fulfillment of mutual 
obligations; humility and generosity; maintain 
relationships; and loyalty and commitment.
All actions and 
steps have been 
assessed against 
these principles. 
22 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 23
1 NATIONAL CONTEXT 1 NATIONAL CONTEXTCOMMITMENT
2
2.1  THE VISION 
STATEMENT
Taking into account Tonga’s national circumstances, the urgency of global 
climate change, inputs from the participatory process and considering 
Tonga’s Second NDC, the vision developed for the LT-LEDS is:
A low emissions Tonga, where all sectors work 
together to create resilience, autonomy and self-
reliance.
The Tonga of 2050 is driven by:
•  Traditional knowledge and culture; This vision 
aligns with and 
•  The health and wellbeing of all Tongans (and every household);
supports the 
•  Education; visions outlined 
in key Tongan 
•  Communities, individuals and government push for change
strategic policy 
This vision is supported by sub-visions and pathways for each emitting sector.  documents 
(more in  
Chapter 5).
2.2 Sector visions 
The following summaries describe sector-specific visions developed by LT-
LEDS stakeholders:
Energy: A Tonga that promotes standards that establish renewable energy, 
energy efficient infrastructure and battery storage facilities.
Transport: A Tonga with low emissions in the Transport sector, achieved 
through sustainable maintenance of transport, knowledge production, 
enforced regulation and decentralisation of services.
AFOLU: A resilient Fisheries and Agriculture, Forestry and Land Use Tonga 
through low emissions, low costs and sustainable systems.
Waste: A resilient, sustainable and educated Tonga, achieved through 
effective education and sustainable waste management.
Human Settlements: Building a resilient and autonomous Tonga through 
transformation and strengthening of all sectors.
Image (opposite page): Mala’ekula, the Royal Tombs 
for Tonga’s Royal Family in central Nuku’alofa, 
Tongatapu. Taken in 2021.
TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 25
2 COMMITMENT STATEMENTKey short, medium 
3
3.1  INTRODUCTION 
and long term 
This chapter provides pathways to low emissions development 
for Tonga that align with overall vision and priority sector 
climate actions
visions established in the preceding chapter. These pathways 
were developed in the form of a prioritised set of actions for the 
mitigation sectors of AFOLU and Fisheries, Energy (focused on 
electricity), Transport (focused on land transport), Waste and 
Human Settlements.  
The pathways build on existing  forests, improving the urban 
policies and strategies to develop  planning process and transforming 
pathways to cut GHG emissions in  the AFOLU sector towards low 
the short term (by 2025), medium  emissions through agro-ecosystems, 
term (by 2030) and long term  land management and technological 
(by 2050). While these updated  advancement. Waste management 
pathways address emission  is collectively seen as having a lower 
reductions by individual sectors,  contribution to GHG reduction but 
working across sectors will also  is laying important foundations for 
be crucial to achieving the vision  environmental sustainability. 
of the LT-LEDS. We will therefore 
All sector-based pathways and the 
need multidisciplinary initiatives 
actions they comprise must support 
that work across multiple sectors 
national economic development as 
in key areas. They include data 
well as seven principles important to 
collection, management and sharing, 
the Tongan people: for the purposes 
mainstreaming and development 
of the LT-LEDS, these were defined 
of future sectoral low emissions 
by stakeholders as environment, 
policies and plans and community 
inclusivity, autonomy, culture, 
empowerment. Multi-sector 
traditional knowledge, education 
initiatives have been highlighted 
and core values (see Chapter 1.5). 
where possible. 
Each of the actions in the pathways 
While the sectoral sub-chapters  below has been assessed through 
below lay out high level pathways  the lens of these seven principles. 
and actions, overall reduction  Overall, autonomy and the use of 
in emissions will be achieved  traditional knowledge are important 
primarily through managing energy  considerations for all sectors. 
demand and continuing renewable  Therefore, all actions in the sector 
energy expansion, establishing a  pathways are framed wherever 
low emissions Transport sector,  possible to identify, support and use 
expanding agroforestry and  local and traditional knowledge and 
forestry and protecting the marine  to highlight local actions that can be 
environment. These key areas will be  taken autonomously.
supported by restoring mangrove 
Image (opposite page): People getting on a small 
raft in Fafa Island, a small atoll located 7km north of 
Tongatapu. Taken in 2020.
TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 27
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS3.2 Energy Relevant  The Renewable Energy Act (2008) regulates Tonga’s use of renewable 
national  energy. It seeks to promote renewable resources by researching and 
policies,  developing opportunities around renewable energy, encouraging the use 
sectoral policies  of commercially sustainable renewable energy technology for both grid 
3.2.1  Context
and links with  connected and standalone power supply systems and also supporting the 
the LT-LEDS engagement of the private sector in renewable energy projects in the country. 
Introduction The Electricity Act (2007) provides rules that apply to the Energy sector and 
establishes the Electricity Commission as a body corporate. The Petroleum 
Energy in this LT-LEDS context refers to the  Tonga’s electricity sector has been undergoing  Act (1959) regulates petroleum imports/exports to and from Tonga. 
working fluid that runs modern-day Tonga,  a transformation with the integration of 
At the National policy level, the Tonga Strategic Development Framework 
with imported fuel accounting for 21 percent  renewable electricity at an increasing rate. 
2015-2025 (TSDF II) includes an ‘Infrastructure and Technology Inputs 
of all imports in 2014 (World Bank, 2021) and  The last five years have shown remarkable 
Organisational Outcome’ (under Outcome 4.1.5) to have more reliable, safe, 
fuel imports for electricity accounting for  progress, achieving 13.5 percent renewable 
affordable and widely available energy services built on an appropriate 
10 percent of GDP (Government of Tonga,  electricity for 2020 with this figure set to 
energy mix, moving towards increased use of renewable energy. The National 
2010). The need to import fuel weighs heavily  double in a year’s time to 30 percent, then up 
Infrastructure Investment Plan 2, 2013-2023 (NIIP II) outlines plans for major 
on Tongan businesses’ operating expenses  to 50 percent by fiscal year 2022 (TPL 2021). 
initiatives in economic infrastructure (energy, telecommunications, water, 
and residents’ disposable income. Tonga, like 
Tonga’s energy transformation was recently  solid waste management, and transport) over the next five to 10 years. It 
every other Pacific Island, has relied mainly 
accelerated by new and comprehensive  responds to the need for a longer term view and sector-wide approach to 
on petroleum fuels for decades to power its 
policies from the Energy Bill (passed in  infrastructure planning and management, with systematic approaches to 
electricity system. Further, Tonga is dependent 
Parliament) and poised to become an  identifying future priorities.
on petroleum fuels for all economic activities 
Act in 2022 (by royal assent). This Bill 
of agriculture, fisheries, forestry, industry, and  From a climate change perspective, the JNAP2 declares that ‘Tonga is 
provides robust policy to establish coherent 
especially, transportation. In 2008, Tonga  committed to reducing its greenhouse gas emissions from the Energy sector 
institutional and regulatory frameworks 
committed to transforming half of all power  principally by increasing its utilisation of renewable sources of energy such 
for coordination of the Energy sector. It 
generation to renewable sources in record  as solar and energy efficient technologies’. It also includes Guiding Principle 
establishes clear national objectives and 
time. Since then, development partners  (9): ‘Long-term sustainability - Initiatives and programs’ that will be designed 
promotes private sector incentives and 
have provided both financial and technical  to deliver long term, positive, environmental, social, and economic benefits 
research initiatives. When passed as an Act, 
assistance to support this ambition. With such  founded on ensuring self-sufficiency at all levels of Tongan society. The Tonga 
the Energy Bill will begin the development 
a dramatic transition needed to upgrade the  Climate Change Policy (2016) (TCCP) lays out Tonga’s extreme vulnerability 
and adoption of a National Energy Policy 
electrical system, Tonga’s institutions and  to the adverse effects of climate change and disaster risks because of its 
to include Tonga’s ambitious targets of 70 
policies were reformed alongside the progress  geographical, geological and socio-economic features, while the Second 
percent and 100 percent renewable electricity 
of these renewable aspirations. NDC has a mitigation target of a 13 percent (16 Gg) reduction in GHG 
in 2030 and 2035, respectively. 
emissions from the Energy sector (including transport) by 2030. One of the 
Addressing the interwoven challenges of 
With massive transformations underway in  key measures to reach this target will be achieving 70 percent renewable 
energy security, climate-change and energy 
renewable energy generation, distribution  electricity by 2030. 
access, Tonga’s energy transformation 
and policy, Tonga’s future electricity system 
began with bold policies in the Renewable  In terms of sectoral policy, the TERM is the main governing document for 
will perform with ever-increasing complexity. 
Energy Act (2008). In 2009, the Government  the Energy sector. It lays out a strategic plan to reduce Tonga’s vulnerability 
Operating, maintaining and controlling the 
of Tonga (GoT) approved a goal of 50  to high prices and the volatility of imported fuels and has, at its centerpiece, 
renewable electricity system of the future will 
percent of electricity to be generated from  the target of 50 percent renewable electricity by 2020. The Tonga Energy 
require technology upgrades across almost 
renewable energy sources by 2020, which  Road Map, 2021 - 2035 (TERMPLUS) Framework provides analysis of the 
every area, with significant capacity building 
became the centerpiece of the ground- TERM to provide a foundation for and build the next 15 year energy strategy 
needed to develop skills in those who manage 
breaking Tonga Energy Road Map 2010–2020  document, which will govern the Energy sector in years to come. The Tonga 
Tonga’s increasingly dynamic network.
(TERM). Subsequently, Tonga followed  Energy Efficiency Master Plan (TEEMP) provides strategies for the most cost-
TERM strategies from 2010 to 2020 resulting  effective and most reliable initiatives for saving energy and reducing costs 
in a series of renewable electricity and  and GHG emissions. TEEMP EE and GHG targets are achievable, to ensure 
network upgrade projects moving from total  feasibility of transition to an energy efficient future.
dependence on fossil-fuels to an increasing 
share of renewable electricity. Remarkably, 
Responsible  The Department of Energy (DOE) within the Ministry of Meteorology, 
alongside this transition, Tonga electrified 
Ministries  Energy, Information, Disaster Management, Environment, Climate Change 
its remote populations resulting in over 95 
and Sector  and Communications (MEIDECC) is largely responsible for Energy sector 
percent of the total population now with 
Stakeholders policy in Tonga. State-owned electric utility Tonga Power Limited (TPL) is 
access to electricity country-wide. Today 
the main implementer of energy projects on its 4 major networks. Both the 
however, Tonga continues to rely significantly 
DOE and TPL develop and maintain projects that are on-grid (connected to 
on non-renewable diesel generation and due 
TPL grid) and off-grid. The new Energy Bill once given approval by the royal 
to COVID-19, the 50 percent renewable target 
assent (2022) will create a new Ministry of Energy. Under this Ministry will be 
has been reset for 2021-22.
responsibilities for all sectors of energy including electricity, gas, petroleum, 
renewable energy and other energy sources. Further a new Energy 
Commission will be responsible for regulation of the Energy sector.
28 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 29
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSENERGY
Historical and  The Third National Communication on Climate Change report (2019) states  Sector Pathway Actions Over Time
current GHG  that the Tonga Energy sector (including transportation) emitted 39 percent 
emissions of Tonga’s GHG emissions, for a total of 121 Gg CO -equivalent in 2006.
2 1 3 5 7
Implement Standards and  Renewable Energy and  Increase access to finance  Technologies like battery 
Current  Over the last 10 years many significant renewable energy and network 
Regulations for renewable  Energy Efficiency to  for the private sector  storage to upgrade, 
initiatives projects have been implemented, with the help of over USD $100 million in 
energy and energy  become part of standard  to fund demand-side  maintain and operate a 
donor funding. This has included funding from the Australian Government,  efficiency technologies  education curriculum renewable energy, projects  renewable energy network
New Zealand’s MFAT, Asian Development Bank (ADB), Green Climate Fund  imported into the country PRINCIPLES and green initiatives  PRINCIPLES
(GCF), European Union (EU) and Global Environment Facility (GEF). Projects  PRINCIPLES Education PRINCIPLES Autonomy & Environment
Environment, Education &  Autonomy, Culture, Core Values 
have included solar, wind, battery and network upgrade initiatives. Current 
Traditional Knowledge & Environment
projects that have made a big impact over the last several years and will 
remain ongoing for the next few years include the Tonga Renewable Energy 
2 4 6 8
Project (TREP), the Outer Island Renewable Energy Project (OIREP) and 
Network Upgrade Programs. EU initiatives supporting energy bill research,  Draft regulation and policy  Draft regulation and policy  Increase access to finance  Government to provide a 
paper for Infrastructure  paper to support roll out  for the private sector  loan program to private 
writing and adoption are also currently active. 
developed using green  of LED Street and Interior  to fund supply-side  sector for Low Energy 
infrastructure standards LED Lamps renewable energy, projects  Buildings
PRINCIPLES PRINCIPLES and green infrastructure PRINCIPLES
Environment & Education Core Values, Autonomy &  PRINCIPLES Autonomy, Education & 
Traditional Knowledge Autonomy, Core Values,  Environment
Traditional Knowledge, 
Education & Environment
Start implementing standards & regulations
1
POLICY
Renewable Energy & Energy Efficiency enters standard education
3
WORKFORCE
Enforce codes & provide skills & training 
8
POLICY & WORKRFORCE
Update Building Codes for Energy Efficiency & Resiliency
8 INVESTMENT
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
3.2.2  Sector Pathway This sectoral pathway focuses on electricity generation 
and consumption as the main source of GHG emissions. 
Building an Energy sector that promotes high standards of  50%  Energy Bill  13% (16 Gg) reduction  100% RE, Sust. Transp., 
The Energy sector vision is:  RE becomes  in GHG emissions  Data, Inclusion, Resilience
renewable energy systems and energy efficiency measures  1 Energy  from energy 
Act
3
‘A Tonga that promotes  will require each project to be delivered as an integrated 
Increase access to finance for the private sector to fund supply-side RE 
solution. As a priority, demand-side (consumer-side)  6
standards that  FINANCE
efficiency measures should be deployed wherever possible 
establishes renewable  on a country-wide basis. Further, optimising incentives  Technologies upgrade, maintain and operate a renewable energy network 
7
energy, energy efficient  through electricity rate structures and renewable energy  TECHNICAL
financing will ensure that government, businesses and  Roll out LED lighting retrofit program 
infrastructure, and  residences are aligned and assist in the co-creation of the  4 TECHNICAL
battery storage facility.’  future power generation system. 
Regulation & policy for green infrastructure standards 
Community awareness, knowledge and capacity building  2 POLICY
are essential to gaining country-wide support for the 
Increase access to finance for the private sector to fund demand-side RE 
ambitious trajectory of Tonga’s electricity system.  5
FINANCE
Education around energy consumption, energy supply 
and renewable energy projects will help consumers 
support changing technology and systems. A new model 
will be required so the electric utility can collaborate with 
consumers, businesses and government. Higher standards, 
regulations and enforcement will be needed for building 
green infrastructure, retrofitting existing structures and 
purchasing interior energy efficient equipment.
Existing Second NDC Targets
30 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSPathways  ENERGY   Renewable Energy and Energy Efficiency to become 
Description
ACTION 3 
part of standard education curriculum.
ENERGY  Implement Standards and Regulations for renewable  GHG Reduction potential: Low.
ACTION 1  energy and energy efficiency technologies imported  Description: Including renewable energy and energy efficiency as standard in 
the education curriculum will assist in providing jobs and careers for Tonga’s 
into the country.
people. Building wide knowledge of renewable energy and energy efficiency 
technologies and systems will enable capacity building for Tonga’s future 
GHG Reduction potential: High. experts to support a green growth future.
Description: Implementing standards and regulations will provide for more  Supporting asset and capacity measures: Educational institutes to provide 
complete and optimal solutions. It will ensure that any project developed or  programs for energy efficiency education and practical technical vocational 
equipment procured is of the highest quality available to continue to move  training as well as on-site labs for testing equipment. Radio and television 
Tonga toward a clean, sustainable energy pathway. The TEEMP will provide  ads can support interest and knowledge building by touting the benefits of 
high energy efficiency equipment standards adopted from neighboring  energy efficiency solutions for home and businesses.
countries of Australia and New Zealand. The Energy Bill poised to become 
Location: All of Tonga.
an Act in 2022 will provide broad powers to enact standards and regulations 
Timeline: 2022 just after Energy Bill becomes an Act.
with the DOE. 
Principles: Not provided, but would at least include Education.
Supporting asset and capacity measures: The DOE will need to train, deploy 
and set-up proper inspections at airports and wharves to ensure high- Links to Second NDC: None.
standard compliance for the import of renewable energy components and  Links to other mitigation sectors: All sectors.
energy efficiency equipment.
Location: Starting in Tongatapu with some remote inspections in Vava’u and 
ENERGY   Draft regulation and policy paper to support roll 
Ha’apai.
ACTION 4  out of light emitting diode (LED) street lamps and 
Timeline: Implementation of standards and regulations will begin by 2022 
when the Energy Bill becomes an Act. interior LED lamps.
Principles: Environment, Education and Traditional Knowledge.
GHG Reduction Potential: High.
Links to Second NDC: Renewable Energy (RE) & Energy Efficiency (EE) 
Mitigation Measures. Description: A complete LED Street Lamp Retrofit Program for all outdoor 
roadway and outdoor lights. Also includes an Interior Light retrofit to LT-
Links to other mitigation sectors: All sectors.
LEDS in existing Government Buildings and as part of new building codes. 
Once existing lights have been retrofitted, all future street lamps and interior 
Draft regulation and policy paper for infrastructure  lights should automatically specify LED as standard. Due to the issue of wide 
ENERGY   developed using green infrastructure standards. variation in LED lamp technologies, this project should include local ‘pilot-
ACTION 2  testing’ to cover lamps of different manufacture. Some testing of optimum 
lights for exterior & interior spaces is also needed. Additionally, information 
GHG Reduction potential: Medium.
about efficiency in lumens-per-watt should be verified by an independent 
Description: All public infrastructure should be developed using latest 
testing lab. All findings to be made available to update the TEEMP and 
principles of clean energy, energy efficiency, and resilience as well as 
to place country and island-wide projects in the upcoming NIIP II update. 
integrating with local natural resources and reducing waste of all types. 
Projects can (and should) be developed as public-private-partnerships, with 
This will ensure the planning and development of infrastructure for Tonga 
the GoT providing up to 50 percent of funding on high-return efficiency 
incorporates the latest green standards that focus on improving local 
projects (return on investment of 3-5-years is normal).
environments. All future development policy should look to build on the 
Supporting asset and capacity measures: Existing lighting infrastructure to 
Waste Management Act and Tonga Housing Recovery and Resilience policies. 
be used where possible - and replaced only where needed. Start training a 
Although costs in the beginning may be higher due to higher infrastructure 
workforce to undertake this rollout, with collaboration from GoT and TPL.
standards, life-cycle cost and improvement to the environment is projected to 
Location: Phase 1 - starts with the major villages of Tongatapu, moving 
outweigh initial added expenses. New standards for green infrastructure are 
to Phase 2 - more populous outer islands and Phase 3 - remote inhabited 
to become part of NIIP II and upcoming NIIP 3.
islands.
Supporting asset and capacity measures: Green infrastructure projects 
Timeline: 2021-2025 - education and capacity building; 2025-2030 - 
including waste infrastructure to be deployed on existing assets and 
implementation; 2030-2050 - operation, maintenance and enforcement of 
upcoming refurbishments as well as in new builds.
new lighting standards / ordinance.
Location: Commence with pilots and projects in Tongatapu and apply lessons 
Principles: Core Values, Autonomy, Traditional Knowledge and Environment.
to outer islands.
Links to Second NDC: EE Mitigation Measures.
Timeline: 2025 and beyond.
Links to other mitigation sectors: Human Settlements and Transport.
Principles: Environment and Education.
Links to Second NDC: RE & EE Mitigation Measures.
Links to other mitigation sectors: All sectors.
32 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 33
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSENERGY   ENERGY   ENERGY   ENERGY  
ACTION 5  ACTION 6  ACTION 7  ACTION 8 
     
Increase access to finance for the  Increase access to finance for the  Technologies like battery  Government to provide a loan 
private sector to fund demand- private sector to fund supply- storage to upgrade, maintain  program to private sector for 
side renewable energy, projects  side renewable energy, projects  and operate a renewable energy  low energy buildings.
and green initiatives. and green infrastructure. network.
GHG Reduction Potential: High.
GHG Reduction Potential: High. GHG Reduction Potential: High. GHG Reduction Potential: Medium. Description: Update building codes for 
energy efficiency and resilience as well as 
Description: An electricity system serving large  Description: Tonga’s stated goals are to  Description: To support a renewable energy 
enforce compliance for government, business 
customers or an aggregation of customers can  achieve 70 percent then 100 percent renewable  network, upgrades are needed on Tonga’s 
and residential buildings. New codes for 
perform more efficiently if it can be switched  electricity by 2030 and 2035, respectively. To  electricity grids. 
green infrastructure projects will also require 
on-or-off according to demand. Supporting  achieve this, many inputs must be coordinated,  Supporting asset and capacity measures: 
significant capacity building. 
asset and capacity measures: Existing  including applying the best technologies for  Existing network in Tongatapu to receive 
network of Tongatapu to be upgraded to a  a Tonga-context setting, from the Pacific and  network upgrades to allow the penetration of  Supporting asset and capacity measures: 
‘smart-grid’ that can allow two-way flow of  around the world.  renewable electricity to rise to 70-100 percent.  New buildings planned and designed using the 
electricity. Capacity-building will be needed  Supporting asset and capacity measures:  Most network upgrade equipment and capacity  latest building codes in the Pacific. Existing 
for a new generation of electric utility control- Existing land-sites that can add storage  building will come from development partner  buildings to be retrofitted. This needs highly-
room specialists. Automated controls are  systems and additional renewable equipment  countries like Australia, New Zealand and the  skilled and knowledgeable technicians to 
needed for shedding (reducing) load on large  are ideal. New ideal land-sites (typically,  United States. Appropriate battery storage,  provide both resiliency- and energy efficiency-
customers like water pumps or large industries.  royal-lands) for renewable energy resources  centralised SCADA, Controls and advanced  measures. Provide education and training to 
Aggregating loads (where individual energy  need to be obtained as soon as practical.  transmission and distribution infrastructure  tradespeople working on these structures and 
users band together to reduce costs) will need  Capacity development needed from external  will allow maximum capabilities for storing,  develop programs to educate construction 
an expert system, such as Supervisory Control  consultants that analyse for renewable  transmitting and distributing renewable  industry businesses and the workforce about 
and Data Acquisition (SCADA), which can also  resources needs to be funded and applied.  electricity when penetration levels hit above  latest materials and equipment used for new 
turn off-and-on systems like air-conditioners,  Development partner funding for specific RE  50 percent RE. Significant development  buildings and upgrades to existing building 
water heaters, lights, etc. Electricity & energy  projects in sequence can be determined from  partner funding and capacity building will be  stock. Upgrade important structures to 
regulators should work with electricity  TERMPLUS documents and investment plans.  needed for the network projects in tandem  Category 5 to be resilient to the strongest 
concessionaires to drive incentives for large  Feasibility studies will be needed on pushing  with the large funding for pure RE projects.  cyclones. Government to provide loans to make 
customers or large aggregators through policy.  the limits of renewable energies from solar and  The TERMPLUS should address these network  these structures more resilient and able to 
TEEMP should include updates on these  wind plus smart networks with appropriate  issues. Funding needs to be provided by  withstand the new normal of climate change 
policies and technology platforms and the  storage. Capacity-building is needed for TPL  development partners for capacity building  events..Learn from other countries like the 
TERMPLUS should include these measures. The  technicians that will implement and operate  for new skills in operating, maintaining and  islands of Japan (Okinawa) about building 
parallel development of a smart network with  advanced RE systems. Strengthened and close  managing a complex smart-grid. cost-effective and climate-resilient structures.
centralised control is needed as a foundation  coordination as well as common understanding  Location: Tongatapu. Location: All islands (however, most buildings 
for these programs. of RE goals among major energy stakeholders;  are in Tongatapu).
Timeline: 2025-2030.
Location: Tongatapu.  especially the GoT Ministries and TPL. RE goals  Timeline: 2022-2023 - update building codes; 
Principles: Not provided, but should at least 
Timeline: 2025. should also be codified in national and sectoral  2022-2050 - enforce codes and provide skills 
include Autonomy and Environment.
plans like NIIP II, TERMPLUS as well as TPL  and training.
Principles: Autonomy, Culture, Core Values, 
Business Plans. Links to Second NDC: RE Mitigation Measure.
Environment. Principles: Not provided, but should at least 
Location: All inhabited lands need to be  Links to other mitigation sectors:  include Autonomy, Education, Environment.
Links to Second NDC: RE Mitigation Measures 
addressed, starting with the largest grid of  Transportation, Human Settlements, Waste.
(allows more RE to flow on grid). Links to Second NDC: EE Mitigation Measures.
Tongatapu. Certain renewable resources like 
Links to other mitigation sectors:  Links to other mitigation sectors: Human 
biomass from plants and animals may only be 
Transportation (electric vehicle (EV) charging/ Settlements.
feasible on the larger islands. Certain renewable 
discharging), Human Settlements and Waste, 
resources like biomass from plants and animals 
Agriculture (water-pumping).
and renewable fuels like hydrogen may only 
be feasible on the larger islands. Geothermal 
resources would need to be located near large 
populations.
Timeline: 2021-2030–feasibility studies; 2023 - 
ongoing capacity building; 2023 - ongoing on 
the job training; 2025-2030 - implementation 
of projects.
Principles: Autonomy, Core Values, Traditional 
Knowledge, Education, Environment.
Links to Second NDC: RE Mitigation Measures.
Links to other mitigation sectors: All sectors.
34 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 35
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS3.2.3  Socio-economic and environmental considerations Environmental  Renewable energy system upgrades and projects should be informed by 
and social  comprehensive environmental impact assessments, in order to understand 
Skills and  Education, training and capacity building are fundamental to the  safeguards  whether such projects would have wider impacts on local environments. This 
capacity  transformation of Tonga’s traditional fossil-fuel based electricity system to  considerations is especially true in the case of battery energy storage systems, given that 
building needed a new, renewable electricity system. Currently however, there is a shortage  some customers have objected to the use of smart equipment in their homes, 
of skills and experience in the technical and regulatory areas needed  specifically smart meters. It is important to address such concerns through 
to implement Tonga’s ambition to achieve 70 percent then 100 percent  public educational bulletins and other outreach resources, before deploying 
renewable electricity by 2030 and 2035, respectively. equipment island-wide.
Over the recent time period leading up to COVID-19, external consultants 
Key data gaps  Tonga’s success in the Energy sector relies heavily on obtaining, managing 
were flown in to do much of the technical planning and implementation. 
and solutions and disseminating data that supports the march to its 70 percent and 100 
Now, with development partners keenly aware of the need to train Tonga 
percent renewable electricity goals. Importantly, development partners and 
nationals to continue this work, funding for capacity development has just 
donors require appropriate and accurate data to unlock funding sources for 
started. Intensive technical training of electric utility workers will be needed 
upcoming projects and monitor their implementation. 
for Tonga’s new renewable electricity system/s. Trained workers also need 
incentives to stay in Tonga and deploy their skills. New building codes for  Renewable resource optimisation will be ever more important to the ongoing 
green infrastructure projects will require significant capacity building. Outer- implementation of further renewable electricity as penetration levels reach 
islands communities will require capacity building for new off-grid projects  higher percentages. Added resources will need to be identified, and intensive 
remote locations. Legal & regulatory training will be needed for the energy  analysis will also be needed to determine the most appropriate sequence for 
regulator that will be established from the Energy Bill/Act (2022). project implementation. Tonga Power Limited (TPL) will need to optimise its 
control of a more complex electricity grid (one that flows two-ways) and will 
Cross-sectoral  Energy touches on all other sectors including Transport, Human Settlements,  necessarily need to incorporate a much more sophisticated system. This will 
considerations Waste and AFOLU. Energy system transformation requires significant  require audits of TPL’s business structure, alongside comparisons with other 
education and capacity building for all of Tonga, so that ambitious initiatives  electric utilities achieving high-penetrations of renewable energy. 
can work to benefit all. However, there might also be short term pain with 
With Tonga’s Energy Bill poised to become an Act in 2022, the major 
price increases, before price reductions are experienced - and this is also 
responsibility for proper data collection and dissemination will reside in the 
where a strong educational and marketing programs can be best deployed.
new Ministry of Energy. It will be essential for the Ministry of Energy to model 
Increasing renewable energy sources will produce dramatic positive impacts  and adapt ideas from other country governments which have been successful 
for long term green growth and could also spur economic development in new  in collecting, storing and disseminating such intensive energy information. 
areas where renewable energy can be best deployed, for instance, integrating 
Surveys of other electricity networks that are pushing the boundaries of 
transportation systems and microgrids for disaster management purposes.
renewable electricity integration will be needed, in order to determine the 
most appropriate renewable solutions for a Tongan network.
Gender and  The role of men and women, including behavioural change around purchasing 
social inclusion  energy efficient household appliances, should be examined. Specific 
considerations  communication and awareness campaigns may be needed for specific 
groups. Measures should be implemented to ensure that low-income and 
vulnerable groups are not excluded from benefits or penalised by higher 
prices of more efficient appliances. 
With regard to renewable energy implementation for homeowners, it should 
be stressed that low-income groups need to be made aware of and given 
some subsidy to equalise access to the benefits of renewable energy (solar 
photovoltaics) on the home. 
The role of men and women in the buildings sector and construction industry 
should be examined to ensure women can also participate in learning and skill 
development/job creation. Differences between urban and rural areas should 
also be taken into consideration to ensure that low-income and vulnerable 
groups are not excluded from benefits or penalised by higher costs of a new 
building code. Specific communication and awareness campaigns may be 
needed for specific groups.
Importantly, all Tongans should enjoy the benefits of sustainable renewable 
electricity. All strata of stakeholders must be supported in receiving 
information and taking action to implement beneficial cost-effective home 
appliances and home solar systems. Therefore, training and capacity building 
programs should be inclusive across all of society. 
Image: Maama Mai Solar Facility at the Tonga Power 
Limited’s Power Station in Popua, Tongatapu. 
‘Maama Mai’ means ‘let there be light’. Taken in 2021.
36 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 37
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS3.3 Transport Relevant  One of the goals defined in the TSDF II is the provision of safer, more reliable, 
national  and more affordable transport infrastructure and services to achieve dynamic 
policies,  and inclusive growth across the country. 
sectoral policies 
3.3.1  Context The NIIP II outlines these priorities for the maritime space: (i) reduce the 
and links with 
cost of services to reduce transport costs and improve Tonga’s international 
the LT-LEDS
competitiveness; (ii) improve the sustainability of maritime infrastructure 
Introduction
by ensuring adequate maintenance, so as to minimise long term costs and 
maximise availability; (iii) enhance inter-island shipping services to help 
Tonga’s Transport sector depends exclusively  Due to the isolated nature and relatively small 
improve socioeconomic conditions; (iv) increase the safety of the transport 
on imported petroleum products (GoT 2015)  size and population of a number of Tonga’s 
system, and its resilience to climate change and natural disasters, to 
and accounts for approximately 90 percent of  islands, inter-island shipping forms a vital part 
minimise disruptions; (v) strengthen and reform the institutional framework 
end-use petroleum oil demand in Tonga. Road  of the supply chain. Many of the smaller islands 
that governs the management, maintenance, and financing of maritime 
transport is the dominant mode of transport,  have neither docking capability for larger 
infrastructure and services; and (vi) promote and better use a competitive 
while domestic shipping (for transportation of  vessels nor airstrips, making them reliant on 
private sector. The Ports Authority Tonga (PAT) Business Plan 2019–2024, 
people and goods and fishing) is also important.  supply by small boats for commerce, social, 
also has, amongst its aims, the promotion of sustainable growth and a 
Domestic aviation plays a small role.  educational and medical needs. Domestic 
sustainable environment. Industry, Innovation and Infrastructure - SDG9, calls 
shipping is provided by the government-owned 
For land transport, the 2016 vehicle stock was  on the global community to build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive 
Friendly Islands Shipping Agency and a variety 
estimated at 6,031 cars, 7,103 light trucks, vans  and sustainable industrialisation, and foster innovation. The pathways laid 
of private sector parties including private 
and SUVs, 2,099 heavy duty vehicles, 953  out in this LT-LEDS will therefore contribute towards this, as well as to the 
shipping companies, churches, small vessel 
taxis and rentals, 306 motorcycles and 225  sustainability aims of the NIIP and PAT Business Plan 2019-2024.
operators and a community cooperative (World 
buses (TEEMP, 2020). There are currently no 
Bank, 2015). Service to major islands in each of  The Tonga Climate Change Policy sets the targets of ‘a transport system 
vehicle standards in place but the government 
Tonga’s main island groups is reliable (World  that is not reliant on fossil fuels’ and ‘100 per cent renewable energy’. This 
is seeking to restrict importation to newer 
Bank, 2015) but services are weather affected  LT-LEDS aligns with this aim as well as with the aims of Tonga’s Second 
vehicles and has put in place a 10 year age limit 
and may be cancelled due to windy and/or  NDC which states a target of reducing GHG emissions from the combustion 
for imported vehicles. 
rough water conditions, particularly during  of fossil fuels by 13 percent (16 Gg) by 2030, compared to 2006. The NDC 
Vehicle ownership is high. There are  the cyclone season (World Food Programme  specifies a Transport sector measure of 2 percent efficiency gain per year 
approximately 18,200 households in the country,  (WFP), Undated). As of 2014, there were 250  for newly purchased light duty vehicles to contribute to the NDC emission 
owning a total of 16,000 vehicles (Tonga  seafarers in Tonga (World Bank, 2015). The  reduction target. The LT-LEDS pathway for transport supports this NDC aim 
Statistics Department (TSD), 2016) with 59  Government has stated its highest priority for  through either establishing mandatory vehicle standards and/or incentives for 
percent of households owning at least one car  the maritime sector is increasing the safety and  purchasing more efficient vehicles through taxes, fees, or import tariffs.
(TSD, 2019). Based on vehicle stock figures, the  resilience of all maritime activities, especially 
country has an estimated motorisation rate of  in relation to inter-island shipping (LCA, WFP,  Responsible  All transport responsibilities come under the Ministry of Infrastructure (MOI), 
approximately 160-170 vehicles per 1,000 people  Undated). The current available data does  Ministries  under which sit a number of entities managing land, maritime and aviation 
(United Nations Climate Technology Centre and  not allow for a breakdown between diesel  and sector  sub-sectors. The main actor in land transport is the Land Transport Division 
Network (UNCTCN),2018; TSD, 2016) which is  used in road and maritime transport. However,  Stakeholders of MOI. The main actors in the maritime sector in Tonga are the Marine and 
relatively high compared to other countries in  domestic maritime transport likely represents  Ports Division (MPD) of the MOI, Ports Authority Tonga (PAT), Ministry of 
the Asia-Pacific region. Road transportation is  a considerable share of diesel consumption. In  Education, Tonga Maritime Polytechnic Institute (TMPI) and a number of 
concentrated on Tongatapu, with 85 percent  future, expansion of cruise passenger arrivals  private sector actors. The MPD is responsible for oversight of the maritime 
of fuel for road transportation being used on  as part of tourism may have implications for  sector (policy, regulation of domestic shipping, ship registry operation, 
the island (TEEMP, 2020). Estimates suggest  increased fuel use, GHG emissions and other  port and flag state control, auditing of PAT and TMPI). MPD also manages 
a total of approximately 200 million vehicle  environmental impacts. and operates six domestic ports (World Bank, 2015). The MOI also collects 
kilometres travelled per year, which translates  data on domestic shipping, including the number of ferries, the number of 
Freight transport via aviation in Tonga is limited. 
into almost 2,300 vehicle kilometres travelled  passengers, and the volume of cargo delivered to various wharves (GoT and 
Domestic planes are small and mostly serve 
per capita (GoT and UNCTCN, 2018). Under a  UNCTCN, 2018). PAT is responsible for the management and operations of 
for passenger travel. There are no dedicated 
business as usual scenario, an average annual  Nuku’alofa Port. It is a government-owned enterprise overseen by the Ministry 
cargo planes. From 2008-2012 less than 5 
growth rate of 2.4 percent for vehicle kilometres  of Public Enterprises. The aviation sector is overseen by the Civil Aviation 
percent of jet fuel was reported as being used 
travelled during the period 2016-2050 is  Division of MOI. The Ministry of Trade and Economic Development (MTED) is 
for domestic aviation (IRENA, 2013). In addition, 
projected, translating into an equal growth in  responsible for importation, and this ministry and the customs service have 
assuming that the vast majority of aviation 
fuel consumption from road transport (TEEMP,  a role to play in implementation and enforcement of vehicle standards. The 
gasoline is used for local travel (generally used 
2020; UNCTCN, 2018). In general there is a  MTED also manages standards, including fuel standards. 
in small, short-distance airplanes), domestic 
preference for car usage over motorbike, cycling 
aviation represents approximately a quarter of 
and walking and a lack of infrastructure for non-
fuel consumption in aviation.
motorised transport. Congestion on the main 
roads of Nuku’alofa is a concern.
38 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 39
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSHistorical and  The Transport sector is the second largest source of greenhouse gas  3.3.2  Sector Pathways The sector focuses on land transport as the largest 
current GHG  emissions in Tonga (GoT, 2019).. One-third (37%) of fossil fuel supply is used  emission sub-sector within transport, according to data 
emissions for electricity generation, while approximately two thirds (63%) are used for  currently available. Given domestic aviation’s small 
The Transport sector vision is: 
direct final consumption (Department of Energy, 2020). The Transport sector  contribution to transport GHG emissions, it is not a focus 
accounts for approximately 80% of total final consumption, dominated by  ‘A Tonga with low  of the LT-LEDS. 
road transport, representing 70% of total final consumption. 
emissions in the  Targets to reduce GHG emissions from maritime 
GHG emissions from the Transport sector primarily reflect emissions  transport and aviation were not examined in this LT-
Transport sector, 
from land transport which accounts for 60 percent of Energy sector  LEDS due to the lack of commercially viable alternatives, 
emissions according to the Third National Communication (GoT, 2019).  achieved through  at least in the short term. This may, however, change in 
Hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons, sulfur hexafluoride, ozone and aerosol  sustainable maintenance  the medium-term and this sub-sector can be revisited 
precursors are not covered in the GHG inventory. Emissions based on liquid  once more data and information is available, along with 
of transport, knowledge 
fuels sold to aircrafts and ships engaged in international transport are not  commercially viable alternatives. 
covered in the national emissions totals. There is no data available regarding  production, enforced 
Priority areas for the transport pathway were identified 
share of emissions from the maritime and aviation sectors. According to 
regulation and  as improved data collection and waste management 
TEEMP, emissions from land transport will grow by an average of 2.4 percent 
of vehicles, sustainable maintenance and overhaul and 
per year under a business as usual (BAU) scenario (GoT and UNCTCN, 2018).  decentralisation of 
services for vehicles and improved road maintenance. 
services.’ 
These are already set policies and plans for these 
Current  The Tonga Climate Resilient Transport Sector Project 2019–2024 (USD 27  interventions and the LT-LEDS will align closely to 
initiatives million), supported by the World Bank, aims to facilitate the safe, efficient and  existing policies for the short term while enabling future 
sustainable movement of people and goods in Tonga while strengthening  revision of policies to take low emissions measures into 
resiliency of the Transport sector. It has four components. The first; Sectoral  account. The next five years (short term) are planned for, 
and Spatial Planning Tools, involves technical assistance that will improve the  but the door remains open for transformative change 
way climate change is addressed in Tonga’s Transport sectors and allows for  over the subsequent 40 years. This is where the LT-LEDS 
the financing of updates to analytical and sector planning tools to enable  supports new policies, introduction of technologies and 
policymakers to make informed decisions based on the most accurate and  accompanying measures to reduce GHG emissions. Some 
up-to-date information available. The second component; Climate Resilient  of the medium term priorities identified for the pathway 
Infrastructure Solutions, involves feasibility studies, design and physical  were low emissions vehicles, including mandatory vehicle 
works of identified road, aviation and maritime assets to improve their  standards, and a 100 percent electric government fleet 
resilience to climate related hazards and/or events. The third component;  and non-motorised/cycling options. In the long term, the 
Strengthening the Enabling Environment, will provide funding to support  aim is for public adoption of electric vehicles.
institutional and regulatory reforms for Transport sector asset management 
A combination of mode shifts, improvements in vehicle 
and maintenance, including measures to strengthen local capacity and to 
efficiency and use of alternative fuels (e.g. renewable 
increase the sustainability of climate resilient investments under the project; 
electricity) as mentioned in this pathway, would reduce 
and the fourth component; Contingency Emergency Response is designed 
GHG emissions from road transport by 28 percent by 
to provide a swift response in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, 
2030, compared to a BAU scenario (TEEMP, 2020). As 
by enabling the GoT to ask the World Bank to reallocate project funds to 
actions in this pathway are transformative, awareness 
support emergency response and reconstruction.
raising and clear communication strategies for different 
The Fanga’uta Lagoon bridge project in Nuku’alofa aims to relieve congestion  actions will be very important, and should include 
and connect communities. It will also provide an evacuation route to higher  promoting transparency and information availability to 
areas in the event of a tsunami and extreme weather events, and facilitate  the public.
long term climate change-induced relocation of communities currently living 
in low-lying areas, to higher areas (ADB 2021).
The ongoing Nuku’alofa Port Upgrade Project will rehabilitate, renew 
and expand existing infrastructure. And it will improve management and 
operations practices with the aim of achieving safer, more reliable, and more 
affordable transport infrastructure and services in Tonga (ADB 2020). 
The Green Pacific Port initiative integrates applicable global approaches and 
promotes more efficient port infrastructure and operations, in a regional 
project implemented by The Pacific Community. The Green Pacific Port 
approach explores port development that enables holistic - operational, 
energy-conscious, and environmental - management of ports. The initiative’s 
benefits extend to reduced environmental impacts, better quality of working 
and living in port areas, and greater commercial benefits (ADB 2020). PAT 
joined the initiative in 2018. 
40 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 41
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSTransport 
Sector Pathway Actions Over Time Pathways 
Description
1 4 7
Improved transport data collection  Decentralization of services from  Strengthen Sustainable Maintenance  TRANSPORT   Improved transport data collection and waste 
and waste management urban to rural areas to decrease  of all vehicles ACTION 1 
management.
PRINCIPLES traffic congestion PRINCIPLES
Environment, Education, Autonomy,  PRINCIPLES Environment
Culture & Core Values Inclusivity, Environment, Education, 
GHG emission reduction potential: Low and mostly indirect.
Autonomy & Core Values
Description: This action involves improved data collection across all areas 
2 5 8 of the Transport sector, including consumption behaviour and transport 
preferences, breakdown of fuel use for land, maritime and aviation, and 
Mandatory vehicle standards and  Low Emissions Vehicles Implementation of Non-motorised 
incentives for more efficient vehicles  PRINCIPLES and cycling transport options separation and classification of transport waste. Mandatory data collection 
through tax, fees and import tariffs Autonomy, Environment & Inclusivity  PRINCIPLES systems and procedures will be put in place with awareness raising and 
PRINCIPLES Environment, Traditional Knowledge and  training provided. At the policy level this includes policies on abandoned 
Education, Environment, Inclusivity, Culture  Culture and well aligned to Inclusivity,  vehicles, vehicle and boat collection and scrappage, and data collection for 
& Traditional Knowledge Autonomy, Education & Core Values
transport energy consumption (aligned with the new Energy Bill). Policies for 
3 6 9 all new vehicles will be considered to allocate responsibility to the importer 
or exporter, for vehicles’ end of life removal, before replacements can be 
Strengthening Road maintenance— Introducing Electric Vehicles (EVs) in  Public adoption of 50% Electric  brought in. 
Tanu Hala the municipal government fleet Vehicles (EVs)
Supporting asset and capacity measures: For vehicle waste - a central facility 
PRINCIPLES PRINCIPLES PRINCIPLES
Environment Environment, Education & Culture Environment, Education, Inclusivity,  for collection and disposal or preparation for export of scrapped vehicles. For 
Autonomy & Core Values data collection - laptops, tablets, drones and mobile apps.
Location: For vehicle waste - Tongatapu only. For data collection - across 
Low emissions vehicles the whole Kingdom of Tonga. However, consideration needs to be given for 
5
WORKFORCE & POLICY constraints around data collection in the outer islands, though this could, in 
Strengthening Road maintenance—Tanu Hala  part, be overcome by technologies that facilitate remote data collection.
3 WORKFORCE Timeline: 2025 with a phased approach across all of Tongatapu only for 
vehicle waste; 2030 for improving data collection.
Mandatory vehicle standards & incentives for more efficient vehicles 
2 POLICY Principles: This action is highly aligned to Environment and is also well 
aligned to Education, Autonomy, Culture and Core Values.
Improved data collection 
1 Links to Second NDC: None.
POLICY
Links to other mitigation sectors: Waste for disposal of vehicles and boats, 
Preparatory activities for public adoption of 50% EVs  including setting up of a central facility for collection and vehicle disposal.
9
WORKFORCE
Preparatory activities for non-motorised & cycling transport 
8
TECHNICAL & WORKFORCE
Strengthen Sustainable Maintenance of all vehicles  Emergency services in every district 
7 4
TECHNICAL & WORKFORCE WORKFORCE
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Reducing 13% (16 Gg) 
Tonga Climate Resilient 
Transport Sector Project  Reduce GHG 
2019–2024 (World Bank) emissions from road 
transport by 28% 
Phased approach across Tongatapu for vehicle waste 
1
POLICY
Introduce EVs in the municipal government fleet 
6
TECHNICAL
Pilots start for cycling paths and pedestrianization 
8
WORKFORCE AND INVESTMENT
Pilot starts for public for public adoption of 50% EVs 
9
TECHNICAL AND INVESTMENT
Full implementation for non-motorised & cycling transport 
8
WORKFORCE AND INVESTMENT
Image: Traffic congestion at Veitongo, Tongatapu as 
Existing Second NDC Targets Full implementation for public adoption of 50% EVs  vehicles are headed to the eastern side of the island 
9 TECHNICAL AND INVESTMENT in the evening. Taken in 2021.
TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 43
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSTRANSPORT   TRANSPORT   TRANSPORT   TRANSPORT  
ACTION 2  ACTION 3  ACTION 4 ACTION 5 
   
Mandatory vehicle standards  Strengthening road  Decentralization of services  Low emissions vehicles.
and incentives for more efficient  maintenance—Tanu Hala. from urban to rural areas to 
GHG emission reduction potential: Medium.
vehicles through tax, fees and  decrease traffic congestion.
Description: Mandatory vehicle standards for 
GHG emission reduction potential: Low.
import tariffs. newly purchased light duty vehicles (private 
Description: This action refers to improved  GHG emission reduction potential: Low.  cars, taxis, minivans, etc.) with incentives 
road maintenance focusing on pothole repair 
GHG emission reduction potential: Medium. Description: This action involves focusing on  through taxes, fees and import tariffs. The 
and road resurfacing. This will reduce travel 
decentralisation of services from urban to rural  action would include policies favouring 
Description: This action involves policy,  costs, including movement of agricultural 
areas in order to decrease traffic congestion  low emissions vehicles, the introduction of 
regulations and/or incentives to increase  produce to markets, and support introduction 
around Tongatapu, but it is also applicable  regulations and standards, enforcement of 
uptake of more energy efficient, lower  of newer vehicles, e-vehicles, as well as cycling 
to the centre of island districts. This action  penalties for non-compliant vehicles (this could 
emissions conventional vehicle technologies.  and walking where road resurfacing can be 
includes a strategic plan for decentralising  be enforced at the border, with the importer), 
Policies to operationalise this will include  combined with introduction of dedicated 
services, incentives to locate or relocate key  incentives for compliant vehicles (both for 
bans on certains types of vehicles, regulations  cycle paths and pavements. To implement 
utility services/agencies offices outside of  importers and consumers, to encourage 
on imported vehicles to meet low sulfur  this action, standards (tanu Hala) with regular 
Nuku’alofa CBD so that people can reach  purchase). 
standards (e.g. Euro 4), high import tariffs  reporting and greater transparency will be 
services locally, expansion of internet services  Supporting asset and capacity measures: 
on inefficient vehicles and lower tariffs for  introduced, and weight limits for trucks will be 
through the development of apps and digitised  Infrastructure - new inspection buildings and 
efficient vehicles, and a maximum age of  put in place. A road asset management system 
services, incentives for employees to move/ equipment for testing vehicles. Short courses 
imported vehicles of 5 years. This will be  will be implemented to support this action.
work in decentralised offices, and recruitment  and vocational training would be implemented 
accompanied by enforcement with penalties.  Supporting asset and capacity measures:  of staff based in decentralised locations. This  for enforcement agency staff, government 
An awareness raising campaign will support  Infrastructure - road repairs and resurfacing  action may also involve encouraging private  employees, technicians and professionals. In 
behavioural change and promote the benefits  will be needed as well as road maintenance  companies to decentralise services and  the medium term tertiary studies could also 
of this approach, as well as raise awareness of  trucks. For capacity building, a range of short  operations over a certain size, and to provide  support this action as standards evolve. A 
enforcement and penalties.  term and medium term measures are needed,  minibus services for employee pick-up and  communications strategy would be needed to 
Supporting asset and capacity measures:  including on the job training and short courses  drop-off in mornings and afternoons. support effective implementation of this action. 
Inspection equipment and buildings, or specific  for road repair contractors, truck owners and 
Supporting asset and capacity measures:  Capacity building in the short term would focus 
areas for tests and inspections. Capacity  drivers and government employees, particularly 
Infrastructure - parking and road maintenance  on awareness raising for the general public, 
measures will need to involve a broad range of  those involved in roads and transport work.
(linked to Action 3), Internet access and  including multiple rounds of awareness raising 
stakeholders. General awareness raising with  Location: All of Tonga. digitisation of services and buildings for  and outreach programs to communities. 
the public in the short and medium , to provide 
Timeline: 2030. decentralised services. Capacity building  Location: All of Tonga.
everyone with good access to information, 
measures will need to continue from medium 
particularly on enforcement and penalties.  Principles: This action is well aligned to  Timeline: 2030.
to long term, including awareness raising 
Environment.
Delivery of this action will also need short  Principles: This action is highly aligned with 
for the general public, short courses for 
courses for government officials, technicians  Links to Second NDC: None.  Autonomy and well aligned with Environment 
government employees and professionals and 
and mechanics, customs officers, transport civil  Links to other mitigation sectors: Human  vocational training for technicians.  and Inclusivity.
servants, owners of large commercial fleets  Settlements for road planning. Link to Second NDC: This action supports the 
Location: This action would start with 
and other private sector professionals. And 
NDC target of a 2 percent efficiency gain per 
Nuku’alofa and the Tongatapu districts, then 
these capacity building measures will need to 
year for newly purchased light duty vehicles 
also be implemented for the centre of each 
continue periodically for the medium term, to 
through either establishing mandatory vehicle 
island district. Locations would be further 
embed behaviour change.
standards and/or incentives for purchasing 
defined by the strategic plan for decentralising 
Location: All of Tonga.  more efficient vehicles through taxes, fees, or 
services.
Timeline: 2030. import tariffs. 
Timeline: 2040, with emergency services 
Principles: This action is highly aligned to  available in every district by 2050. Links to other mitigation sectors: Energy 
Education and well aligned to Environment,  (energy efficiency).
Principles: This action is highly aligned to 
Inclusivity, Culture and Traditional Knowledge.
inclusivity and is well aligned to Environment, 
Link to Second NDC: This action supports the  Education, Autonomy and Core Values.
NDC target of a 2 percent efficiency gain per 
Links to Second NDC: None.
year for newly purchased light duty vehicles 
Links to other mitigation sectors: Urban 
through either establishing mandatory vehicle 
Planning and Energy (particularly energy 
standards and/or incentives for purchasing 
efficiency).
more efficient vehicles through taxes, fees, or 
import tariffs. 
Links to other mitigation sectors: Waste 
for disposal of old and inefficient vehicles 
including setting up of a central facility for 
vehicle disposal.
44 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 45
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSTRANSPORT   TRANSPORT   TRANSPORT  
ACTION 6  ACTION 7   ACTION 8  
Introducing electric vehicles  Strengthen sustainable  Implementation of non-motorised and cycling 
(EVs) in the municipal  maintenance of all vehicles. transport options.
government fleet.
GHG emission reduction potential: Low. GHG emission reduction potential: Unknown.
GHG emission reduction potential: Low, but  Description: This action focuses on overhaul  Description: This action focuses on the expansion and creation of new cycling 
the potential to grow significantly beyond the  and maintenance services for all types  and pedestrian pathways/sidewalks both within and outside the central 
government fleet as EVs are implemented. of vehicles, and enforcement of related  business district of Nuku’alofa. It includes the development of an integrated 
regulations for both public and government  urban planning program (homes, employment, transport), dedicated cycle 
Description: This action focuses on making 
vehicle fleets.  lanes, pedestrians-only city centre areas (cyclist and pedestrians only paths 
the municipal government fleet 100 percent 
electric. The government would lead by  Supporting asset and capacity measures:  /roads) and permanent removal of import duties for bicycles. This will be 
example to implement a pilot project for  This action would involve the introduction of  brought together under a green cities program with a sustained 5-year 
e-vehicles in the municipal fleet.  safety inspections to assist with enforcement  awareness raising campaign on health benefits of cycling and walking.
of maintenance every 3 years. Inspection  In the past, Tongans walked a lot, so there are strong linkages to culture 
Supporting asset and capacity measures: 
equipment and new inspection buildings  which can be reactivated, making this a matter of learning from the past and 
The action requires procurement of EVs 
attached to current garages would be needed.  building it into the future of sustainable transport and community health. 
for the government municipal fleet and 
The action would also support implementation  Given that it offers many all-round benefits and fits well into traditional 
charging stations at government buildings. 
of ISO14000 and ISO 9001:2015 and other  Tongan life, non-motorised transport is a high priority.
It would need changes to policies around 
vehicle procurement, and awareness raising  international best practice and standards,  Supporting asset and capacity measures: Infrastructure - adapting road 
among civil servants and the general public.  as well as insurance policies for fleets,  layouts and creating safe separation between different modes of transport, 
It also requires piloting the introduction of  maintenance and inspection programs, and  adding cycle lanes and space and infrastructure for parking bikes safely, 
new regulations and standards for electric  green procurement policies.  adding pavements /sidewalks and creating new dedicated paths for cycles 
vehicles. As a pilot, the action will need to  Implementation within ministries from top to  and pedestrians. Creating green spaces and pathways which make it pleasant 
include Information and Communications  bottom of management would encourage fleet  to cycle or walk in pedestrianised or exclusively cycling areas.
Technology (ICT) for monitoring, collection  management programs to be put in place. As  This action will require a broad range of capacity building (awareness raising, 
and storage of EV operational data - this  significant changes in attitudes towards vehicle  short courses, tertiary and vocational training well as integrating information 
will be very important to enabling planning  maintenance will be needed, behavioural  into lessons in primary and secondary schools (e.g. about the environmental 
around future EV applications. There will also  change would also be supported through  and health benefits of cycling and walking) amongst target groups. These 
be close cooperation and exchange of data on  various measures. This capacity building will  groups include the general public, women and youth, government employees, 
electricity with TPL. Capacity building for the  be mainly short term and include awareness  primary and secondary school teachers and students and professionals in 
pilot will be needed in the short term, including  raising and short courses for the general public  urban planning and transport. Capacity building needs to start immediately 
short courses and ongoing training for Ministry  and government employees. and continue into the medium and long term as the action is envisioned to be 
drivers and mechanics and government  Location: All four main island groups. implemented all the way to 2050. 
employees, with Ministries involved in the EV 
Timeline: 2030 in incremental phases. Behavioural change and community and individual participation will also be 
fleet pilot being fully engaged in maintenance, 
Principles: This action has good alignment to  important and will form a significant component of this action. Studies will 
management and data collection. Awareness 
the Environment principle. be carried out to determine how to influence behaviour through enforcement 
raising among all Ministry staff as well as the 
and incentives, and to uncover which initiatives might work best with 
general public would be undertaken. Links to Second NDC: None. 
different target groups. A communications strategy will be developed and a 
Location: Nuku’alofa. Links to other mitigation sectors: None.  long term awareness campaign implemented. Incentives and requirements 
Timeline: 2025. for ministries and larger companies to provide facilities to encourage cycling 
by employees like showers, changing rooms, personal lockers and secure bike 
Principles: This action is highly aligned to 
parking will also be implemented.
Environment and Education and well aligned to 
Culture. Location: Nuku’alofa.
Links to Second NDC: None. Timeline: 2022 - preparatory activities and some actions (such as 
sidewalk construction underway); 2025 - pilots start for cycling paths and 
Links to other mitigation sectors: Energy and 
pedestrianisation; 2030 - 2050 - full implementation.
particularly renewable electricity generation.
Principles: This action is highly aligned to Environment, Traditional 
Knowledge and Culture and well aligned to Inclusivity, Autonomy, Education 
and Core Values. 
Links to Second NDC: None.
Links to other mitigation sectors: Human Settlements for urban planning.
46 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 47
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSTRANSPORT  
ACTION 9 
Public adoption of 50 percent  Infrastructure - EV charging stations and 
parking spaces as well as safer roads for 
electric vehicles (EVs).
electric bikes. Introduction of a variety of EV 
technology including private vehicles (bikes, 
GHG emission reduction potential: Medium to  cars, minivans), electric buses and taxis and 
high, depending on percentage of electricity  electric motors for small boats.
derived from renewables to charge EVs.
A broad range of capacity building (awareness 
Description: Tongatapu is a very well suited  raising, on-the-job training, short courses, 
location for EVs, it has the population, it is flat,  tertiary and vocational training) will also be 
only 60 and 30km in each direction. TPL are  needed. This would need to start in 2022 and 
engaged in the discussion on EVs and have  continue into the medium and long term, as 
started research to look into a transition to EVs  the action is envisioned to be implemented all 
and what this means for electricity generation.  the way to 2050. Target groups for capacity 
This action would follow-on from the piloting  building are the general public, youth, car 
of EVs within the government municipal fleet  dealers, government employees, car mechanics, 
(Action 6). It involves expanded adoption of EVs  TPL staff and professionals in urban planning 
to the public, including different types of light  and transport.
duty EVs (cars, bikes, minivans, etc.). 
Location: Phase 1 - Nuku’alofa; Phase 2 - all of 
Supporting asset and capacity measures:  Tongatapu.
Introduction of national EV regulations and 
Timeline: 2022 - preparatory activities 
standards - to ensure safety and good quality, 
start; 2025 - pilots start; 2030 to 2050 - full 
introduction of regulations and standards for 
implementation.
battery management and disposal, alignment 
Principles: This action is highly aligned to 
of incentives for tax/duties/tariffs with the 
Environment and well aligned to Education, 
different stakeholders (car dealers, consumers 
Inclusivity, Autonomy and Core Values.
and TPL), provide rebates for EV purchasers 
and for charging station set-up, create special  Links to Second NDC: None. Image: View of Taufa’ahau Road from the Tungi Colonnade Building in Nuku’alofa, Tongatapu. Taken in 2021.
parking spaces reserved for EVs and the option  Links to other mitigation sectors: Energy, 
of a shared EV scheme may also be explored.  particularly renewable electricity generation.  3.3.3  Socio-economic and environmental considerations
These initiatives would start with studies to  Note that renewable energy generation would 
determine which EV and charging technologies  need to increase significantly to cater for  Skills and  Sustainable transportation is a new field of work with limited experience 
to focus on and the optimal design and  demand from EVs, in order to achieve emission  capacity  on the ground in Tonga. A broad range of capacity building measures 
implementation of incentives schemes.  reductions. strengthening  (awareness raising, on-the-job training, short courses, tertiary and vocational 
needed training) would therefore be needed. Additionally, integrating information into 
lessons in primary and secondary schools (e.g. about the environmental and 
health benefits of cycling and walking, how EVs work, etc.) will need to be 
implemented, starting as soon as possible to begin building knowledge. The 
acquisition of knowledge, skills and experience will be a long term undertaking, 
An additional  This strategy will be ready as a first draft in November 2021 and will inform 
all the way to 2050. Target groups for capacity building also range widely, 
action arising  interventions for low emission development in the maritime sector. It can 
from the general public, to women and youth and government employees 
which has not  therefore complement actions focused on the land Transport sector, as laid 
(particularly those involved in energy, transport, road construction and urban 
been prioritised  out in this LT-LEDS. 
planning), to primary and secondary school teachers and students at the 
but is currently 
A further specific action for maritime transport is the implementation of  vocational and tertiary level, private sector car dealers, mechanics, technicians 
underway is 
ferry transportation across the Fanga’uta Lagoon. This would involve the  and professionals in energy, transport, civil engineering and urban planning. 
the completion 
public leaving their vehicles behind and using the lagoon ferry to travel to 
of a maritime  Overseas training/courses will be helpful in expanding local experience 
Nuku’alofa instead of driving. The ferry could be electric - an option that 
transport low  by integrating innovative and new technologies from countries where 
could be explored in future. 
GHG emissions  EVs are already implemented. This will apply to a broad range of areas 
strategy.  Additionally, the option of an electric bus network was explored but not  such as policy-making, regulations and standards for EVs, as well as 
prioritised, though this may be revisited in future as E-Buses are being  technologies, maintenance and implementation. To complement this, capacity 
studied as a potential pilot for the TERM-PLUS which is being completed in  strengthening for data collection, management and storage is needed. This 
2021. To date, biofuel has not offered a cost effective option. It also conflicts  can also be facilitated through increased availability and use of electronic 
with food security and thus has not been considered in this LT-LEDS. Further  equipment such as laptops, tablets, storage devices/servers as well as drones 
exploration of biofuels as an alternative fuel for both land and maritime  and mobile apps which could enable remote data collection.
transport may be revisited in future, although potential conflict with food 
security will again need to be carefully examined, as food security would 
always be a priority. 
48 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 49
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSCross-sectoral  There are strong linkages between the land Transport sector and energy  through vehicle and battery collection, scrappage and disposal management 
considerations efficiency and urban planning. For example, action on pedestrianisation of  systems put in place early. Another area of risk in terms of waste, is 
Nuku’alofa and appropriate road and pathway design for e-vehicles, cycling  where there is an increase of electronic equipment for data collection and 
and walking will need to be coordinated with urban planning entities and  management for the e-waste which must be disposed of in a safe manner. 
undergo broad consultation across communities involved. 
There will also be benefits: lower GHG emission vehicles will also reduce 
ICT can play an important role in supporting decentralisation of services.  other pollutants such as sulfur and particles, so there will be co-benefits for 
In this respect, reliable internet could be a major factor alongside key  the environment and there are also significant social co-benefits in terms 
infrastructure investment. The latter not only refers to the decentralisation  of better health outcomes from increased walking and cycling which can 
of physical infrastructure, but also the human resource needed to operate  contribute to reduced obesity and reduced non-communicable diseases.
and maintain it. It would, therefore, also involve the management of human 
resources potentially across a number of ministries and the civil service. This 
Key gaps data  Data management is fragmented with responsibilities shared among the 
could be assisted by short courses and vocational training to be provided for 
and solutions Ministry of Infrastructure (MOI), PAT, the Tonga Statistics Department (TSD), 
staff who are recruited to decentralised posts.
and the Ministry of Revenue and Customs (MORC). The private sector also 
The sector also has close linkages with health and healthier lifestyle choices,  collects important trade performance information, but this is not always 
such as cycling and walking, which could deliver added benefits such as  publicly available due to confidentiality issues. As the Transport sector is one 
reduced obesity and incidence of non-communicable diseases in Tonga. of Tonga’s main GHG emitters, a coordinated effort is needed with a number 
of Ministries involved, including MEIDECC, MTED, the TSD, and development 
partners, in order to improve data collection and availability. This will enable 
Gender and  The actions needed in this pathway include significant communication and 
planning to allow a future where the Transport sector makes a greater 
social inclusion  awareness raising among the general public and other groups. In order to be 
contribution to emission reductions, and allow for more detailed emission 
considerations as effective and efficient as possible, this awareness raising must take into 
reduction targets to be set during the 2025 NDC revision process.
account gender and the roles of different groups within the Transport sector, 
and be tailored to reach all audiences. Where behaviour change is desired,  Improved data for the Transport sector is a top priority as identified in the 
incentives should also take into account different characteristics among  pathway action 1. As well as improved data collection for the number of 
gender and society groups. vehicles, and vessels, number of passengers, transport routes and length 
of journeys, improved data is also needed regarding vehicle stock and 
Development of policies should include a gender-sensitive approach. 
vehicle efficiency, passenger/traveller behaviour and preferences, cargo 
Changes in transportation regulations, standards and other issues need to be 
volumes by mode of transport (passenger and freight kilometres by mode 
as transparent as possible, with information available to the public in a timely 
of transport), marine and aviation data. For example, there is currently no 
and effective manner. 
breakdown between passenger and freight kilometres travelled. Given that it 
Actions to improve non-motorised transport (walking, cycling),  describes two different activities, namely the movement of people versus the 
decentralisation of services and improvements in public transport would offer  movement of goods, such a breakdown would be useful for analysis and the 
major benefits around social inclusion, making services more easily available  development of projections. 
to all segments of the population. This is likely to boost access to services and 
Improved data collection is also needed in order to distinguish clearly 
facilitate improved transport options for low-income families, families without 
between fuel consumption for international and domestic aviation and 
cars / access to private transport, women, the elderly and vulnerable groups.
international and domestic shipping. Being able to distinguish between these 
There is a risk to social inclusion if vehicles and compliance become too  is relevant, as only GHG emissions from domestic aviation and shipping 
expensive for lower-income households. Further studies are therefore needed,  are counted towards national emissions. This would require collection of 
to ensure cost distribution is right, with measures put in place to ensure  petroleum product demand by type of end-use and mode of transport (e.g. 
equity in the transition to low emission vehicles. diesel for road transport versus diesel for shipping; fuel for domestic versus 
international aviation/shipping).
For capacity building and training it should be taken into consideration that 
vehicle technicians and government drivers, as well as the maintenance and  There is no information on the relevance of non-motorised transportation 
inspection sector for transport, etc. can be male dominated. Ways to also  in Tonga though high vehicle ownership rate could indicate limited use of 
involve women across Transport sector actions will therefore need to be  non-motorised transportation. However, there are a number of assumptions 
studied with an action plan developed, so that men and women are learning  and caveats behind this assessment. Firstly, the high ownership rate per 
from new projects and experiences and skills development, with the creation  household is based on the assumption that the large majority of households 
of potential jobs available to all. own more than one vehicle. Secondly, it assumes that vehicles owned by a 
household are shared by individual household members. Thirdly, it assumes 
Environmental  Where additional transport infrastructure is put in place the appropriate EIAs  that the vehicle is frequently used. These assumptions should be further 
and social  would need to be undertaken. For example, there may be some infrastructure  investigated through surveys, interviews and other data collection such as 
safeguards  such as e-mobility charging stations, cycle paths and sidewalks needing an  adding questions to the census, to gather information on non-motorised 
considerations EIA if in new areas. However, most infrastructure will already likely be built on  transport. 
existing roads and will not need EIA.
Finally, there is no systematic collection of passenger and freight data in 
There are risks that as vehicles are replaced they are dumped instead of being  the aviation sector by the Civil Aviation Division (CAD), CAD can, however, 
scrapped properly and that as e-vehicle batteries need to be replaced they  request data on passenger numbers and freight from operators, which would 
are dumped instead of disposed of safely. Both these risks must be managed  improve data for domestic aviation for future analysis.
50 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 51
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS3.4 Agriculture, Forestry and Other 
Land Use (AFOLU) And Fisheries
3.4.1  Context
Introduction
Agriculture, forestry and other land uses along  a national forestry inventory is needed. The 
with fisheries form an integral part of Tonga’s  forestry sector is mainly government managed 
economy and culture and are the leading  with limited private sector initiatives other than 
productive sectors for Tonga (IFAD, 2017) as  nursery seedlings. The government runs forest 
well as AFOLU being the largest source of  nurseries and small-scale sawmilling, mainly 
GHG emissions.  as part of cyclone response and recovery 
works. Since the early 1970s, there has been 
Agriculture, fisheries, and forestry provide 
a focus on developing timber plantations in 
30 percent-40 percent of employment, 
‘Eua and promoting public tree planting via 
contributing 18 percent of total GDP (2013/14) 
seedlings produced at forest nurseries run by 
and 44 percent of exports (MAFFF, 2015a). 
the Ministry of Agriculture Food, & Forests 
Agriculture, agroforestry, and fisheries are 
(MAFF). The main timber species promoted 
often the only sources of livelihoods in remote 
include Caribbean pine (Paini), Red cedar 
and isolated rural areas, therefore measures 
(Sita kula), Mahogany (Makoni), Teak (Tiki) 
that reduce emissions without adversely 
and Kauri (Kauli). While sandalwood is the 
affecting these livelihoods, will be key to 
prominent export forest product, its export is 
climate resilience. Subsistence agriculture 
currently banned under “Tonga Sandalwood  Image: Displays of local seafood at the annual Royal Agricultural Show at Neiafu, Vava’u. Taken in 2019.
predominates: only 5 percent of Tonga’s 
Regulation 2016” which seeks to promote 
farmers are commercial producers who engage 
replanting and safeguard unsustainable harvest 
directly with formal markets. Key agricultural 
of sandalwood. Invasive species such as the 
Relevant  At the national level, the AFOLU sector draws direction from three of TSDF 
commodities are root crops (cassava, yam, 
Tulip and Kotia have also been introduced. 
national  II’s outcomes: (i) urban and regional (island/rural) agriculture development; 
sweet potatoes and swamp taro), squash, 
Sawmilling, including coconut palm wood 
policies,  (ii) good governance through the MAFF and (iii) sustainable environment 
and vanilla (MAFFF, 2015a). Coconut-based 
utilisation is a declining industry. There is 
sectoral policies  and climate resilience. With regard to adaptation and building resilience to 
agroforestry was commercially important in 
growing demand, especially from women, 
and links with  climate change, the JNAP2 identifies as a priority the implementation of 
the past, including for export markets, and 
for multipurpose trees/plant varieties for 
the LT-LEDS climate-smart agriculture, fisheries and aquaculture and water management 
offers potential for future economic growth. 
landscaping and floriculture activities, hence a 
approaches. Areas in common with the LT-LEDS include community 
Animal husbandry is locally important. In 2015 
growing number of small, private tree nurseries 
engagement; data collection and management; operational monitoring 
there were 100,000 pigs and 92,071 chickens 
operate in Tongatapu. 
systems for groundwater, soil health and coastal conditions; and involvement 
in Tonga but few cattle, sheep, or horses. 
Commercial forestry is limited, but many  Fishing is among the most important economic  of civil society organisations in raising awareness on climate change. Key 
Tongans depend on forest products for their  activities of Tongans for subsistence, semi- JNAP2 targets relevant to the AFOLU sector of the LT-LEDS are (1) resilient 
subsistence, and more depend on the various  subsistence, and commerce, providing food  fisheries development and marine and coastal ecosystems conservation, 
forms of agroforestry (combinations of trees  security and income (Kronen, 2004a & 2004b;  including special management areas (SMAs); (2) resilient, low-chemical-input 
and other crops), including coconut   FAO 2010) and contributing 3 percent of GDP  or organic farming systems; and (3) allocation of 30 percent of Tonga’s land 
woodlands, which cover much   (GCF, 2018). Fish (including live reef fish)  to be used for agroforestry or forestry.
of Tonga’s land mass.  dominated Tonga’s exports in 2013-14, at 22  At the sectoral level, the Tonga Agriculture Sector Plan (TASF) 2016-2020 
percent, followed by crustaceans and other 
identifies the vision and priorities for maximising contributions from the 
There is considerable scope for boosting 
aquatic invertebrates at 20 percent and other 
agriculture sector both to national economic growth and to sustain Tonga’s 
agricultural productivity, but there are also 
marine products such as seaweed and live 
food security in the face of a changing world economy, looming climate 
considerable challenges. More than half (51 
hard coral (FAO, nd; MAFF, 2015a). Fisheries 
change, and natural disasters in the Pacific. The TASF’s Programme 1, 
percent) of agricultural land is left fallow due 
production continues to fluctuate substantially 
‘Climate-resilient environment and agricultural systems,’ is relevant for the 
to land rights issues and the high population 
due to changes in policy, resource depletion, 
LT-LEDS, while programs 2, 3, and 4 emphasise an enabling environment and 
of Tongan landowners living overseas (IFAD, 
and climate change impacting the distribution 
sustainability as well as linkages to livelihoods and healthy foods - elements 
2017). Droughts and cyclones have a severe 
of tuna. Barriers to further development of 
which also form an important part of the LT-LEDS.
impact on forestry and agriculture: for 
export markets are market access, unstable 
example, cyclone Ian and severe drought each  The Tonga Forestry Act 2016 has enabled the establishment of regulations 
market prices, and growing local demand (GCF, 
caused extensive damage in 2014 and in 2016  for the protection, control, and management of forest reserves and has 
2018). Numerous reports indicated that coastal 
respectively (FAO, n.d; MAFFF, 2015a).  fostered and encouraged the growth of forest products. The Management 
fishery resources are close to overfishing and 
Plan for the Forests and Tree Resources of Tonga (Forest Management Plan, 
The Food and Agricultural Organisation (FAO)  degradation (Kronen & Bender, 2007; MAFF, 
or FMP) 2017, prescribes actions to enhance the sustainable management 
has estimated that 4.3 percent of native forest  2015b). Fisheries infrastructure remains at a low 
of forests and tree resources. Other key documents are the Tonga National 
cover for all of Tonga is threatened, hence,  level and requires further investment.
Forest Policy (TNFP) 2009, which supports the sustainable management of 
52 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 53
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSTonga’s forests and tree resources, and the Code of Practice for Sustainable  Historical and  Activities in the AFOLU sector account for 61 percent of Tonga’s GHG 
Management of Forests 2010, which provides practical guidelines for the  current GHG  emissions (NDC, 2020). Emissions from agriculture fell between 2000 and 
sustainable management of forest and tree resources of Tonga. The TNFP  emissions 2006. The main greenhouse gasses released from the agricultural sector 
and FMP designate agroforestry as ‘the preferred form of productive land use  are CO, CH , NO , N2 , and CO  (Third National Communication, 2019). GHG 
4 x O 2
in Tonga.’ The Tonga National Land use Policy is currently in its finalisation  emissions sources by sub-categories are enteric fermentation, emissions from 
stage, led by the Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources (MLNR). LT-LEDS  managed soils, prescribed burning of savanna, and urea fertilisation. Total 
AFOLU matters, as well as other sectors, will make necessary links and  GHG emissions were 1.75 Gg - a very small portion of the total GHG inventory. 
affiliation to this national policy as needed. For land use, land use change, and forestry, CO  was the only GHG identified. 
2
CO  removals from forestry decreased from 1997.95 Gg in 2000 to 1879.37 Gg 
The Tonga Fisheries Sector Plan 2016-2024 is a framework for achieving the  2
in 2006, and forestry emissions increased from 147.66 Gg in 2000 to 187.40 
overall sector objective of ‘Increasing sustainable shared benefits for the 
Gg in 2006. The main cause of this change was conversion of forest and 
Kingdom from optimal use of its living marine resources’. It includes four 
grassland biomass. Changes in forest cover and other woody biomass and 
components: sustainable community fisheries, profitable commercial fisheries 
abandonment of managed lands also contributed to CO  removal. However, 
and aquaculture, public and private investment, and governance and capacity  2
uncertainty in land-use data and in the assumptions used to calculate GHG 
building. All four are reflected in the LT-LEDS. 
emissions and carbon sequestration from living biomass, undermines the 
In 2020, the Second NDC set two non-emission AFOLU mitigation sector  reliability of GHG emissions estimates for the AFOLU sector. 
targets: (1) to establish a forest inventory as a prerequisite to identifying a 
GHG emission target for the 2025 NDC and (2) planting one million trees 
Current  Green Environment Facility-funded Ridge to Reef (R2R) projects have been 
by 2023. For adaptation, the NDC sets an AFOLU target of 30 percent of 
initiatives ongoing for a number of years. The first component was completed recently 
land in Tonga to be utilised for agroforestry or forestry by 2025 (aligned to 
and focussed on the rehabilitation of the mangrove ecosystems around 
the JNAP2), and a fisheries target of maintaining existing stocks of fish and 
Tongatapu. The second component, Integrated Land and Agro-ecosystems 
other marine species through a commitment to expand the area covered 
Management Systems, is ongoing. There are several success stories from 
by Marine Protected Areas (MPAs) and Special Management Areas (SMAs) 
these projects, including the adoption of biogas and organic/animal fertiliser 
to 30 percent of Tonga’s exclusive economic zone (EEZ). The LT-LEDS is 
as part of managing the roaming livestock that damages the environment 
aligned to these NDC targets and integrates action towards implementing 
etc; promoting community tree planting efforts via community nurseries and 
them. Overall, the AFOLU sector is cross-cutting across a number of SDGs, 
capacity buildings in related areas; introducing applicable and practical farming 
including: Good health and well-being (SDG 3), Decent work and economic 
practices through women and youth e.g. keyhole gardening, farmer field 
growth (SDG 8), Sustainable cities and communities (SDG 11), Climate action 
demonstrations, and wicking systems for household-level activities; and others.
(SDG 13), Life below water (SDG 14), Life on land (SDG 15), and Partnerships 
for the goals (SDG 17). Tonga Community Development Trust is promoting aspects of conserving 
traditionally useful tree species and home gardening. Tonga National Youth 
Congress is promoting organic farming and certification targeting youth 
Responsible  The Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Forests (MAFF) is responsible for policy 
and is involved in a number of resilient farming activities nationwide. MORDI 
Ministries  and implementation for agriculture and forestry and chairs the Agricultural 
Tonga Trust has been carrying out the Tonga Rural Innovation Project since 
and Sector  Growth Committee (v). The Tonga Agriculture Sector Plan is implemented 
2018, with 122 rural communities. MORDI Tonga engages rural, remote and 
Stakeholders through the AGC, with the Minister of MAFF acting as chair of the AGC 
isolated outer islands including in Tongatapu, ‘Eua, Ha’apai islands, Vava’u 
along with a member of the private sector acting as co-chair. Members are 
islands, Niuafo’ou and Niuatoputapu. The government’s future climate 
mostly from the private sector including MORDI Tonga Trust, Food and 
change pipeline includes the project ‘Towards climate change resilient coastal 
Agricultural Organisation, Bilateral Agencies (Australia, New Zealand etc.) and 
fisheries and aquaculture in Tonga’, which will address effects of climate 
exporters, as well as MAFF’s six divisions representatives. Reporting on the 
change on coastal fisheries through integrated sustainable management 
implementation of the TASP is made regularly to the AGC. 
to ensure food security. The project will cover ecosystems and ecosystem 
For forestry, the Forestry Division is mandated to take charge of forest  services, health, food and water security and livelihoods of vulnerable 
management and development, including development of policies and  communities. This fits with targets under the Second NDC, JNAP2 and 
legislation. The division also monitors the state of forests in Tonga and  fisheries sector plans and will also contribute to the LT-LEDS aims and 
promotes awareness on forests and forestry initiatives. The Department  pathway for AFOLU, particularly in the fisheries sector. Another key project 
of Environment also undertakes nursery and tree planting activities. There  for agriculture involves climate smart agriculture (CSA) approaches for 
is limited private sector involvement apart from the Aotearoa Forest Co.  sustainable food and nutrition and secure livelihoods in Tonga, which aims to 
which is managing the forestry plantations on ‘Eua. Tonga Timber Limited  contribute to achievement of targets of the NDC, JNAP2 and the Agriculture 
has also been involved in plantation management. Some non-governmental  Sector Plan (MEIDECC 2020).3
organisations (NGOs) are undertaking awareness and tree planting programs 
with their local partner communities including MORDI Tonga Trust, the Tonga 
National Youth Congress and the Tonga Community Development Trust.
The Ministry of Fisheries is responsible for policy and implementation in the 
fisheries sector. The Tonga Meteorological Division plays an important role 
in providing weather information to the sectors. The Ministry of Lands and 
Natural Resources (MLNR) has the mandate on all land management and the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs (MIA) also plays important cross-cutting roles in 
the sector. 
3  Please refer to the NDC Implementation Roadmap and Investment Plan with Project Pipeline, Appendix B, 
for more information on current and planned projects
54 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 55
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSAFOLU
3.4.2  Sector Pathways For the AFOLU and Fisheries sector, promotion of best  Sector Pathway Actions Over Time
practices in agriculture, forestry and fisheries is the 
highest priority. This includes the need to strengthen 
This sector’s vision is for: 1 3 5
public-private partnerships among government 
‘A resilient Fisheries and  agencies, NGOs, village communities, church groups,  Strengthen Public Private  Support Community Nurseries  Establish SMA association and 
farmer and fisher groups, and others, to enable sharing  Partnership to drive requirements of  to improve the productivity and  ensure its maintenance through 
Agriculture, Forestry and  organisations with the aim of sharing  diversity of agroforestry financial support and capacity, in 
of responsibilities among stakeholders to meet their 
responsibility to promote best  PRINCIPLES order to support the expansion of 
Land Use Tonga through  objectives as organisations and jointly contribute to low  practices in agriculture and forestry Environment, Inclusivity, Traditional  MPAs and SMAs
low emissions, low costs  emissions actions. Data collection, management and  PRINCIPLES Knowledge, Culture & Core Values PRINCIPLES
accessibility is also a key part of agriculture, forestry,  Environment, Education, Inclusivity,  Environment, Culture, Traditional 
and sustainable systems.’ Autonomy & Core Values Knowledge, Core Values, Autonomy, 
fisheries and land use work. Establishment of a forestry 
Inclusivity & Education
inventory and a digital library of information including 
traditional knowledge, are two key initiatives.  2 4 6
This pathway also focuses on the expansion of MPAs and  Improve coordination of public and  A proposal for low emissions,  Empower women to sustain and 
SMAs and of sustainable, low emissions, low cost, high  private sectors to strengthen and  low cost, high productivity and  enhance home gardening through 
harmonise existing data collections  sustainable AFOLU approach to be  commercialising their produce
productivity and sustainable agriculture, forest and land 
for improved data monitoring and  submitted to the Green Climate Fund  PRINCIPLES
use systems. A holistic and participatory approach is 
information management for the next funding cycle Inclusivity, Autonomy, Core Values, Culture 
envisioned. At the larger scale, this is with improvements  PRINCIPLES PRINCIPLES & Environment
in agro-forestry and at the smaller scale, enhancing  Environment Environment, Autonomy & Inclusivity
home gardening. Training and capacity building will be 
extended to all stakeholders from village groups and 
NGOs, to farmers, fishers, forestry workers, government 
officials and private sector actors.
3rd phase of strengthening PPP 
1
POLICY & WORKFORCE
2nd phase of strengthening PPP 
1
POLICY & WORKFORCE
1st phase of strengthening PPP 
1
POLICY & WORKFORCE
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
30% of land  Establish SMA association to expand MPAs & SMAs 
Ponlaen ting  ibne T uotnilgizae dto f or  5 FINANCING
million  agroforestry or 
trees forestry
Improve data monitoring & information management 
2
TECHNICAL & WORKFORCE
Support community nurseries to improve agroforestry 
3
WORKFORCE
Proposal for Green Climate Fund  
4
INVESTMENT
Empower women to commercialise home garden produce 
6
WORKFORCE AND POLICY
Image: Tree Planting Activity at the 
Mango Tree Respite Center during 
the Department of Climate Change’s 
annual National Climate Change 
Awareness Week. The Tree Planting 
Activity focused on inclusive tree 
planting activities to include people 
living with disabilities. Taken in 2020.
Existing Second NDC Targets
56 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSPathways  AFOLU   Improve coordination of public and private sectors to 
description
ACTION 2 
strengthen and harmonise existing data collections 
for improved data monitoring and information 
AFOLU  Strengthen public private partnership to drive 
management.
ACTION 1 
requirements of organisations with the aim of sharing 
responsibility to promote best practices in agriculture 
GHG emissions reduction potential: This action, while not directly reducing 
and forestry.  GHG emissions, will improve clarity and transparency for the AFOLU 
sector, providing a basis for the calculation of GHG emissions and carbon 
sequestration from forests and other woody biomass. Such an inventory will 
GHG emissions reduction potential: GHG emission potential is difficult to 
serve as the foundation for quantifying GHG emissions from the sector and 
estimate for this action. Emissions reductions will be mainly indirect. 
identifying a GHG emission target for the 2025 NDC.
Description: This action will implement outreach campaigns to promote 
Description: This action will establish the National Forest Inventory with 
integrated agroforestry, with minimum tillage and free from fire, in areas 
carbon-stock assessment and monitoring of all forests and woodlands 
designated for agriculture. It will promote agroforestry as ‘the preferred form 
(including agro-forestry) as called for in the TNFP (2009) and the 
of productive land use in Tonga’ (TNFP 2009, FMP 2017). The action includes 
Management Plan for the Forests and Tree Resources of Tonga (FMP 2017). 
the promotion of best available, socially appropriate practices in all AFOLU 
This action will utilise high resolution satellite imagery where available, 
sectors through agricultural, agroforestry and forestry extension services, 
combined with airborne light detection and ranging and ground truthing, 
supported by public outreach. 
supported by long term ground based observations. The data will be used 
An important element of this work is to involve all stakeholders in planning 
for land use planning and a broad range of other information needs. This 
and implementation, including foresters, agriculturalists and grassroots 
action includes improving coordination between public and private sectors 
implementers, such as local NGOs and church groups, as well as ensuring 
and harmonising existing data collection through the AGC, mainstreaming 
the involvement of women and youth. As part of the planning for this 
necessary actions into Ministry Corporate Plans and annual budgets, and 
action, environmental policies, sector plans and traditional practices will be 
integrating relevant actions into the agricultural census. Market and crop 
reviewed and documented as a basis for making improvements, and this 
surveys will also be implemented at regular intervals. A national data and 
information will be disseminated to stakeholders. New enabling policy will 
information coordination and management group will be established, and 
also be required. Options include subsidies to farmers to encourage adoption 
data collection on outer islands will be enhanced through mobile phone 
of agroforestry, inter-cropping and other practices to retain and enrich 
applications and digitisation. 
soil organic matter (an important carbon stock). The AGC will drive these 
Supporting asset and capacity measures: This action requires computer 
developments and promote partnership-building through enabling policy 
hardware and software, mobile apps, tablets for entering data and services, 
changes. This action will contribute to the following SDGs: Sustainable cities 
including cloud data storage services. Templates to collect data and 
and communities (SDG11), Life on land (SDG15) and Partnerships for the goals 
information for each sector and sub-sector will be developed. Drones will also 
(SDG17); and Tonga’s JNAP2 and Second NDC target for 30 percent of land 
increase ease of data collection and the geographic coverage that can be 
to be used for agroforestry or forestry as well as the NDC target to plant one 
achieved, especially since some areas are inaccessible for humans. Significant 
million trees by 2023. 
short term capacity strengthening is needed including on the job training, 
Supporting asset and capacity measures: This action requires computer 
short courses and survey and data collection training including using trial 
and software supplies, procurement of agricultural and forestry materials, 
agro-forestry sites. The training will target government employees of relevant 
machines and tools, and marketing and partnership tools. Capacity 
departments including ICT, technical and extension staff, responsible NGOs, 
strengthening areas are to train program managers in government, private 
as well as secondary, tertiary and vocational students. A training plan will be 
sector and NGOs and provide on the job training in the short term. In the 
developed and some actions will continue in the medium term as needed.
medium term short courses and mentoring, as well as peer-to-peer learning 
Location: All of Tonga.
would be useful among government agencies and private sector/NGOs.
Timeline: 2025.
Location: All of Tonga including households, communities, districts, outer 
islands, schools, royal estates and government land. Principles: This action aligns well to Environment.
Timeline: This action is split into three phases: present-2025 first phase,  Links to Second NDC: The establishment of a national forestry inventory is 
2026-2030 second phase and 2031-2040 third phase. one of the non-emission targets.
Principles: This action is highly aligned to Environment and Education and  Links to other mitigation sectors: The data collected will also contribute to 
also has good alignment with Inclusivity, Autonomy and Core Values. planning for Energy from biomass.
Links to Second NDC: This action will contribute to the mitigation target to 
plant one million trees by 2023 and the adaptation target of 30 percent of 
land in Tonga to be utilised for agroforestry or forestry by 2025.
Links to other mitigation sectors: Waste and Energy for management and use 
of any increase in biomass waste (e.g. agricultural waste, woodchips/off-cuts).
58 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 59
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSAFOLU   Support community nurseries to improve the  AFOLU  A proposal for low emissions, low cost, high 
ACTION 3  ACTION 4 
productivity and diversity of agroforestry. productivity and sustainable AFOLU approach to be 
submitted to the Green Climate Fund for the next 
GHG emissions reduction potential: This action has high GHG reduction 
funding cycle. 
potential through enhancing Tonga’s carbon sinks. 
Description: This action will focus on improving the productivity and 
GHG emissions reduction potential: To be estimated during development of 
diversity of agroforestry for food, fibre and timber. In addition to its direct 
the proposal.
economic benefits, this action will increase the standing stock (biomass) of 
multipurpose trees with productive and service functions in agroforestry  Description: This action includes mainstreaming low emissions development 
systems, thus boosting carbon stocks.  into MAFF policies, including the Tonga Agriculture Sector Plan and the 
National Forestry Policy and its Corporate plan, increasing private sector 
Tree density and carbon stocks per ha are moderate in these ecosystems, 
involvement, conducting bottom-up planning through the Community 
but agroforestry (including coconut woodlands) covers around 75 
Development Plans (CDPs) and feasibility studies completed where needed. 
percent of Tonga’s total land area (FMP 2017), so the cumulative impact 
MAFF will be increasingly involved in low emissions planning and an AFOLU-
is potentially high. Field testing (trials and demonstrations) will be carried 
based proposal will be developed and submitted for funding in the next GCF 
out to determine tree species that offer optimum potential to be part of 
funding cycle.
agroforestry systems, types of agroforestry or mixed systems, trees for 
specific soil types and terrain, etc. This action includes creating incentives  Supporting asset and capacity measures: There are no immediate asset 
for community nurseries to grow and distribute tree seedlings of productive  needs. These will be determined during the proposal development. Capacity 
species as well as providing training through the private sector, NGOs, Civil  strengthening will include short term on-the-job training and short courses 
Society Organisations (CSO), Community Based Organisations (CBO) and  on policy and planning as well as proposal development, particularly for 
church groups. Nursery infrastructure, as well as planting materials and seeds,  staff in MAFF, MEIDECC and private sector actors (NGOS, etc.). Longer term 
nursery tools and other support, will also be provided. A government financial  capacity building needs will be determined during the proposal development.
mechanism to sustainably support government-run nurseries is proposed,  Location: To be determined during the proposal design and development.
while an increasing proportion of funding will also be allocated to support 
Timeline: 2025.
NGO, privately-run and community nurseries. To plan for implementation of 
Principles: This action is highly aligned to Environment and well aligned to 
the action, a cost-benefit analysis and market study will be carried out to 
Autonomy and Inclusivity.
determine the optimal selection of tree and non-tree species and to identify 
Links to Second NDC: This action links to the need to mobilise financing for 
appropriate water, energy and other infrastructure needs.
the AFOLU sector as articulated in the NDC.
Supporting asset and capacity measures: This action requires nursery 
Links to other mitigation sectors: These will be identified during proposal 
infrastructure, supplies, tools and equipment, as well as fencing materials, 
design and development.
composting machines and vehicles for transportation of supplies, and market 
access, seedlings, planting materials, etc. All community nursery initiatives 
shall link to community, regional and national tree planting programs  AFOLU   Establish SMA association and ensure its maintenance 
whereby key targets will be set and timelines scheduled. Packing houses 
ACTION 5  through financial support and capacity, in order to 
at each district will also support community crops sold locally and abroad. 
Capacity strengthening measures will focus on communities, women and  support the expansion of MPAs and SMAs.
youth leaders, CSOs, CBOs, NGOS and church groups, and will include a 
community-based training program, with on the job training, short courses, 
GHG emissions reduction potential: Low.
mentoring and transfer of traditional knowledge will be developed and 
Description: This action aligns directly with the JNAP2 and Second NDC 
implemented. NGOs and CSOs will also receive support from relevant regional 
objectives to expand MPAs and SMAs to cover 30 percent of Tonga’s EEZ. 
organisations.
More broadly, it will also support resilient fisheries development and marine 
Location: All of Tonga.
and coastal ecosystems conservation. At the policy level, the action includes 
Timeline: 2025, with different initiatives needing to take place in parallel to  developing a national consensus on the definition of MPAs and SMAs and 
meet this timeline. aligning this to international and regional definitions, amendment of laws, 
Principles: This action is highly aligned to Environment and Inclusivity and  establishment of a national SMA association, strengthening enforcement, and 
also well aligned to Traditional Knowledge, Culture and Core Values. conducting feasibility studies to explore financial instruments (such as ‘blue 
bonds’), dedicated funds, and other options for financing MPAs and SMAs. 
Links to Second NDC: This action will contribute to the mitigation target to 
plant one million trees by 2023 and the adaptation target of 30 percent of  An important part of this action is empowering and involving communities in 
land in Tonga to be utilised for agroforestry or forestry by 2025. all steps, to expand and strengthen MPAs and SMAs. Building relationships 
between communities and the national government, together with the 
Links to other mitigation sectors: Increased stock and improved 
devolution of some decision making to communities to manage their own 
management of biomass and agroforestry waste products may contribute to 
resources, will foster community ownership and strengthen enforcement, 
Energy production.
particularly for SMAs. Links between national government and communities 
should be fostered through ongoing and reciprocal communication. 
Supporting asset and capacity measures: Equipment for mapping, 
monitoring, marketing, and communications as well as small boats and 
safety equipment for coastal and maritime operations are also needed for 
this action. Capacity strengthening measures are continuously needed for 
60 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 61
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSthe long term including on the job training, short courses, mentoring and  •  Protect mangrove forests: protect all (100 percent) of intact mangrove 
transfer of traditional knowledge. Capacity building and training will be  forests and other coastal vegetation, as called for in the 2009 National 
Additional 
for government staff, private dive operators (particularly mentoring), SMA  Forest Policy and 2017 Forest Management Plan. Tree density and 
actions 
association members, local communities and women and youth leaders. carbon stock are high per ha. This would include amending the current 
identified but 
Location: All of Tonga, and particularly the outer islands. not prioritised  policy regarding mangrove management, and an approach to explore 
would be payment for ecosystem services. This action would also 
Timeline: 2030 - with involvement of communities in SMAs essential to  at this time are 
include rehabilitation of mangrove forests.
meeting this timeline. listed to the 
Principles: This action is highly aligned to Environment, Culture, Traditional  right. These can  •  Rehabilitation of the Fanga’uta Lagoon of Tongatapu, which once 
Knowledge and Core Values and is also well aligned to Autonomy, Inclusivity  be considered  provided abundant shellfish (Toó, Kuku, etc) and fish (particularly 
and Education. again in future  mullet) to its communities. This lagoon has played a major part in the 
discussions  life of the surrounding communities, with more than 85 percent of the 
Links to Second NDC: This action supports the NDC adaptation target 
around a low  population of Tongatapu residing within its catchment and beyond. 
to maintain existing stocks of fish and other marine species through a 
emissions future  First steps would be to survey the existing marine life and implement an 
commitment to expand the area covered by MPAs and SMAs to 30 percent of 
for Tonga: SMA or MPA as appropriate.
Tonga’s EEZ.
Links to other mitigation sectors: None. •  Creating new products / greater use of current byproducts: Upscaling 
biogas systems and production and diversifying the use of waste / 
agricultural bi-product (e.g. manure). Also piloting algae to biofuels, 
AFOLU   Empower women to sustain and enhance home  nutraceuticals and fertiliser for agriculture and healthy soils. This would 
ACTION 6 gardening through commercialising their produce.   represent a new field of work and decrease the need for imported fuels 
while increasing self-reliance.
GHG emissions reduction potential: Low.
Overall, traditional knowledge is very important in Tongan agriculture, forestry 
Description: Expand production and improve productivity of home gardens, 
and fisheries and is integral to the forms of sustainable agriculture and 
including household agroforestry, with particular attention to home gardens 
agroforestry practiced for centuries in Tonga. Traditional agricultural practices 
managed by women. This initiative is replicable in nearly every household, 
have been well adapted to Tonga’s environment and historical climatic 
using practices that can easily be taught, and could therefore reach 90 
conditions and are still followed by most rural, small-holder farmers. However, 
percent or more of Tongan households. The action will empower women 
short term commercial opportunities and, in some places, local pressure on 
and youth groups to derive greater benefits from home gardening by 
available land, have driven a shift to less sustainable practices, leading to soil 
commercialising their produce for sale at local markets. It is expected to 
loss and conversion of carbon-rich woodlands to carbon-poor open fields. 
stimulate productivity of land and boost food production and local income, 
Smallholder farmers require assistance to adapt to climate change and to 
as well as reducing emissions by increasing and sustaining carbon stocks in 
ensure that their agriculture and agroforestry activities will contribute to LT-
garden soils and biomass. 
LEDS mitigation actions. 
Policy changes to support this action will be needed down to the town 
council level, to facilitate women’s use of unattended town allotments,  Examples include the need for provision of quality open-pollinated seeds, 
provide organic and green agriculture incentives, and to make micro- new varieties of climate and pest-resistant crops with shorter harvest cycles, 
financing available for seeds, tools, and planting and fencing materials.  and advice on the use of organic materials for mulching, composting, and 
Women will also need support to get their produce to market. Appropriate  fertilising. Promoting traditional agriculture and agroforestry by helping 
technology to support food production, weather forecasting, and access to  farmers understand its benefits is an important part of moving the AFOLU 
markets is also needed, with follow-up support from extension officers. At the  sector towards lower emissions. Promotion can use success stories, 
community level, local Town Officers and District Officers can mobilise sub- consultations with communities, and incentive programs for farmers and 
committees and councils to begin this initiative with community members.  farming communities - including women and youth groups - to motivate the 
This action is directly linked to community development plans as well as to a  changes that are needed.  
new food and health policy. 
A key challenge for the AFOLU sector is the increasing demand for meat 
Supporting asset and capacity measures: None. products, with imports rising in recent years to meet it. While there is 
potential to increase livestock production in Tonga, there is also a high risk 
Location: The action will start in Tongatapu and will be progressively 
that this would cause increased GHG emissions, unless initiatives are well 
introduced to all of Tonga’s islands.
planned and implemented through a climate-smart approach, including 
Timeline: 2025 if funding can be mobilised quickly, otherwise 2030.
comprehensive waste recycling.
Principles: This action is highly aligned to Inclusivity, Autonomy and Core 
Values and well aligned to Culture and Environment.
Links to Second NDC: This action will contribute to the mitigation target to 
plant one million trees by 2023 and the adaptation target of 30 percent of 
land in Tonga to be utilised for agroforestry or forestry by 2025.
Links to other mitigation sectors: None.
62 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 63
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS3.4.3  Socio-economic and environmental considerations Environmental  Where there are changes in land use, for example, from open field farming 
and social  to agroforestry, among actions to implement LT-LEDS, environmental and 
Skills and  Strengthening and expanding technical expertise by education and training  safeguards  social impact studies should be carried out as required. These should include 
capacity  is a key cross-cutting element for all LT-LEDS action in the AFOLU sector.  considerations consultation with landowners and communities to investigate potential 
building needed Broad capacity building will be required for a diverse range of stakeholders,  positive and negative environmental and social (E&S) impacts. In the case 
including government IT and technical staff; and non-government agencies in  of data management and collection, there should be minimal E&S impact; 
the AFOLU sector (MAFF, MEIDECC, etc); secondary, vocational, and tertiary  for example, using drones in remote areas will not disturb the natural 
students; NGOs, CBOs, and civil society organisations (such as community  environment. 
groups, committees and councils, women’s and youth groups, and church 
Biosecurity should be considered when introducing new climate-smart seeds 
groups); SMA association members and private dive operators; and other 
and plants, particularly to avoid the risk of introducing potentially invasive 
private sector organisations (such as business associations).
species to which Tonga’s fauna and flora (including traditional crops) are 
While most of the required training needs to take place in the short to  vulnerable. Existing invasive species need to be managed carefully, with 
medium term, some actions require capacity building to continue for the long  priority given to plants and tree species indigenous to Tonga, where these 
term. Options to explore to boost capacity include potential graduate pools  can provide suitable productive and service functions. On the other hand, 
that are not being utilised which can be brought into the AFOLU sector;  some invasive species have also had positive impacts on land protection and 
and incentivising the Tongan diaspora with the required skills to return to  soil improvement.
Tonga. An effort should also be made to tap into knowledge of traditional 
In cases where actions remain at the small-scale level such as those involving 
landowners and experts now present in retired communities who are willing 
communities, village groups, households, and on land already under use, 
to contribute their knowledge. Bringing in expertise for short term and long 
the E&S risks are low. However, if these actions are scaled-up and applied 
term support from the Pacific region and globally could also help bridge 
across Tonga, potential E&S risks should be examined. New policies and 
gaps in specific knowledge and skills ,until these become available in Tonga. 
plans developed for low emissions should incorporate E&S risk assessment 
Agencies such as The Pacific Community and the Secretariat of the Regional 
and mitigation actions, and apply environmental and biodiversity protection 
Environment Programme (SPREP) can assist in boosting expertise available.
laws as needed. For conservation and protection measures (such as SMAs), 
environmental risks should be minimal, and benefits strong. However, if there 
Cross-sectoral  Actions for AFOLU require a cross-sectoral approach encompassing  are potentially negative social impacts such as the displacement or disruption 
considerations agriculture, forestry, and fisheries and interlinkages between these sectors.  of traditional livelihoods, social risks should be assessed and mitigating 
This means actions will have to be implemented through close coordination  actions taken.
of the various ministries and departments responsible for those sectors, as 
well as among a number of other Ministries and agencies that can play a 
Key data gaps  Data gaps are recognised and actions included in the AFOLU and fisheries 
supporting role. Coordination will also be needed to gain access to finance.
and solutions pathway to address them, particularly the establishment of a National 
Beyond those specific sectors, there are strong linkages with food security,  Forestry Inventory, remote-sensing and mapping, and collecting information 
health, disaster risk management and livelihoods. Actions taken for emissions  to make a digital library. Limitations around available data and resources 
reduction should be designed to avoid negative impacts in these areas or  constrains analysis of Tonga’s forestry and agroforestry and leads to 
to mitigate impacts that cannot be avoided. Low agricultural productivity,  uncertainty in quantifying GHG emissions and carbon sequestration from 
increasing food imports, and dietary shifts towards high fat, low quality meats  forests and other woody biomass. The establishment of a forest inventory will 
and low fibre carbohydrates are already negatively impacting Tongan food  resolve this issue and would also assist in tracking progress towards the one 
security and health (Veatupu et al., 2019). The actions laid out in the AFOLU  million trees planted goal of the Second NDC. For fisheries, improved data 
pathway are intended to deliver co-benefits to strengthen domestic food  for production over time, export and licensing statistics and strengthened 
production, food security, and health. There is also potential for cross-sectoral  statistical information will allow for better planning.
co-benefits from using forest and farm waste to generate energy. Additionally, 
Improved data availability across AFOLU and fisheries will enhance feasibility 
natural disaster response and recovery is an essential component of forestry 
and other studies needed to implement a low emissions pathway. In terms of 
and agriculture, as timber is needed in the aftermath of natural disaster 
emission reduction estimates and calculations, the Global Warming Potentials 
events: rebuilding and resiliency of domestic agriculture are important 
(GWP) values used to calculate GHG inventory results are not clear at the 
to recovering quickly in order to provide food security and complement 
moment. This needs to be clearly reflected, to improve transparency. For 
emergency food supplies.
future reviews of the NDC, National Communications and the LT-LEDS, a clear 
statement on the methodology, values, formulas and any default values used 
Gender and  Consideration of gender and social inclusion is critical in the AFOLU sector,  will improve transparency, reporting and planning for emission reductions.
social inclusion  as land ownership, access, and roles differ between men and women. Most 
considerations (88 percent) of employment in agriculture, fisheries and forestry is male 
(MAFFF 2015a). The actions described above will need to take into account 
these differences and strive to be inclusive, with proactive efforts made 
to ensure the inclusion of men, women, and marginalised and vulnerable 
groups is woven into the different initiatives, from policy and investments 
to outreach, training and capacity building. The initiatives also need to be 
replicable and sustainable at a community level, with inclusion of vulnerable 
and marginalised groups. New policies for AFOLU to support low emission 
development should be designed to mainstream gender and inclusivity and 
take into account the Tonga Gender Policy and Action Plan.
64 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 65
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS3.5 Waste Relevant  Tonga’s relevant legislation includes the Waste Management Act (2005) 
national  provides a comprehensive legislative base for the effective development and 
policies,  management of the sector. The Act allows for setting up the waste authority 
sectoral policies  and mandating its functions, powers and responsibilities. In addition the 
3.5.1  Context
and links with  Environmental Management Act (2010) governs the disposal of hazardous 
the LT-LEDS waste and chemicals and the transportation of all kinds of waste. While the 
Introduction Environment Management (Litter and Waste Control) Regulations (2016) 
have been effectively implemented in partnership with local governments and 
have also served as a tool for community education.
Waste management in Tonga has  In terms of climate impact, emissions 
been gradually improving over the  are assumed to be minimal presently,  In terms of policy, Tonga’s Second NDC has a non-emission target of expanding 
last decade. Waste collection has  and the more important waste  the formal waste collection system, including the collection of relevant data 
increased, leading to a reduction in  challenge lies in the link to water  on waste amounts and waste composition, as a prerequisite to identifying a 
open burning of waste, particularly  supplies and adaptation of the  GHG emissions target for the sector in the 2025 NDC. The Tonga Strategic 
on the main island. Most waste is  surrounding ecosystem. If waste is  Development Framework 2015-2025 (TSDF II) includes Organisational 
sent to landfill as there is minimal  unmanaged on the islands, it can  Outcome 5.3: ‘Cleaner environments and less pollution from household and 
recycling capacity. There is a lack of  permeate into groundwater and  business activities building on improved waste management, minimisation and 
recent data, though it is estimated  ecosystems, polluting fragile systems  recycling, making conditions safer, healthier and more pleasant for residents 
that between 10,000 and 16,000  such as the oceans, coral reefs, and  and visitors’. It also contains a specific target of 100 percent enforcement of 
tonnes of waste are produced per  bringing harm to the rich biodiversity  the ‘inefficient electrical appliance ban’ at border control.
year. A solid waste composition  present. The target for the Waste 
assessment in Tongatapu (ADB,  sector is to ultimately reduce waste 
Responsible  The key government bodies are the Department of Environment through the 
2014) revealed that 33 percent of  and increase recycling, but this 
Ministries  Waste Management and Pollution Control (WMPC) Division and the Waste 
municipal waste is green waste  is based on obtaining adequate 
and sector  Authority Limited (WAL), a government-owned enterprise. The WMPC are 
(mostly vegetation), 15 percent is  equipment and funding to implement 
stakeholders actively engaged in regional dialogues and coordinate a range of projects 
organic waste (mostly food) followed  these plans and activities.
to provide improved waste management for challenging waste streams 
by diapers, paper, plastic, glass, 
such as asbestos, mercury, and chemical waste. WAL is responsible for 
textiles, ferrous and nonferrous 
waste management service delivery—waste collection, landfill operations 
metals, and other materials waste.
and management, waste awareness, public bin services, liquid waste 
management, and recycling, including removal of end-of-life vehicles and 
bulky waste. Town and District Officers are responsible for community level 
initiatives, such as public bins and waste awareness, and private sector and 
NGOs also play complementary roles in the Waste sector.
Historical and  The Third National Communication on Climate Change report (2019) states that 
current GHG  the Waste sector represents about 0.3 percent of the country’s greenhouse 
emissions emissions. However, accurate data is lacking, as highlighted in the NDC.
Current  Over the last 20 years, there have been a number of important urban 
initiatives development and waste management projects that have been implemented 
with the help of donor funding , including from Australia, ADB, Japan and the 
United States.
The current National GCF Pipeline as part of the Tonga Country Programming 
Process (Period: 2020 -2023) includes a US$10 million project. It focuses 
on delivering proper waste disposal facilities for all of Tonga and innovative 
waste to energy technology including recycling facilities and solutions for 
better managing waste emissions.
A number of initiatives to develop regional waste management approaches 
for several Pacific Island countries are currently underway. The ‘Moana Taka’ 
partnership between China Navigation Company and SPREP, to which Tonga 
is eligible, enables Tonga to export recyclable materials for free (SPREP, 
2018). The Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility, working with SPREP, 
intends to produce a feasibility study for a regional recycling network as part 
of efforts to improve solid waste management in the Pacific. Funded through 
JICA and administered by SPREP, the Japanese Technical Cooperation 
Project for Promotion of Regional Initiatives on Solid Waste Management, 
Phase II (J-PRISM II) seeks to support technical capacity in Tonga and other 
Pacific Island countries.4 
Image: Locally grown produce, presented at the annual Royal  4  Please refer to the NDC Implementation Roadmap and Investment Plan with Project Pipeline, Appendix B, 
Agricultural Show in Neiafu, Vava’u. Taken in 2019. for more information on current and planned projects
66 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 67
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSWASTE
3.5.2  Sector Pathways To improve the Waste sector in the most effective  Sector Pathway Actions Over Time
manner, the priority intervention is to develop a national 
waste strategy. With in-depth stakeholder consultation, 
The Waste sector vision is for: 1 3 5 7
the strategy will contain a list of costed actions with 
‘A resilient, sustainable  an implementation timeframe. Financing the national  Establish strong Waste  Secure financing for outer  Educate and train  Increased use of local 
waste strategy to ensure effective implementation of key  strategy and integrate the  island waste processing individuals on waste  and recycled construction 
and educated Tonga.  strategy into community  PRINCIPLES handling and management materials
actions is also a priority. The final top priority is updating 
development plans NP PRINCIPLES PRINCIPLES
This is achieved through  the current inventory database, as working with reliable 
PRINCIPLES Autonomy, Culture & Education Autonomy, Culture, Core 
effective education  and up to date data is essential. Core Values Values, Education, Environment 
& Inclusivity
and sustainable waste  Comprehensive education and awareness raising is 
critical to achieving long term gains in the Waste  2 4 6 8
management.’
sector, together with using traditional knowledge, 
More efficient data  Developing/upgrading  Unlearn old habits and  Biogas generators to fuel 
and prioritising the use of local/recycled goods when 
collection and consistent  waste management  teach healthy coexisting  villages; purchase best 
possible. GHG emissions reductions have not been 
update of the database facilities lifestyle to support short  equipment and technology 
accurately assessed as the proposed actions are in early  PRINCIPLES PRINCIPLES and long term training and  for Waste sector; create 
development. NP Autonomy & Culture public awareness on waste waste disposal bins at 
PRINCIPLES village level
Education, Environment &  PRINCIPLES
Inclusivity Autonomy, Culture, Education, 
Environment & Inclusivity
Finalise waste comms strategy & national EAP then roll out 
6
WORKFORCE
Planning, trial & implementation of data collection
2
TECHNICAL
Improve waste management infrastructure 
Secure financing for outer island waste processing 
4
3 WORKFORCE
FINANCING
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
2 GHG emissions target 
for sector identified 
Waste Survey  (2025 NDC)
conducted (PRIF)
Ongoing actions toward biogas generators to fuel villages 
8
TECHNICAL & WORKFORCE
Implement National Waste Strategy 
1
POLICY
Education & training for waste management 
5
WORKFORCE
Increased use of local & recycled construction materials 
7
WORKFORCE
Establishment of a biogas plant 
Image: Landfill at the Tapuhia Waste Management  8 WORKFORCE & TECHNICAL
Facility in Vaini, Tongatapu. Taken in 2021.
Existing Second NDC Targets
68 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSPathway  WASTE   WASTE 
description
ACTION 3  ACTION 4  
WASTE  Establish strong waste strategy and integrate the 
Secure financing for  Developing/upgrading 
ACTION 1 
strategy into community development plans.
outer island waste  waste management 
processing. facilities.
GHG emissions reduction potential: Low-Medium, once actions are implemented. 
Description: The strategy will act as a road map with links to agriculture, 
GHG emissions reduction potential:  GHG emissions reduction potential: 
forestry, fisheries and Energy sectors, as well as manufacturing, commerce 
Medium, if it targets landfills and  Low-Medium.
and tourism, towards sustainable and improved waste management in 
Tonga. It will further flesh out actions proposed in LT-LEDS to enable  sewage. Description: Progressively improve 
implementation. Through comprehensive public consultation, including with  Description: Securing funding will  waste management infrastructure in 
the private sector, the development of the strategy will enable testing of 3R  enable implementation of actions  the country, including the development 
options: replacement, reduction, and refinement, along with the development  identified in the LT-LEDS and future  of controlled landfills, transfer stations, 
of incentives, regulations (such as banning single use items, increasing fees  actions that will be identified in  transport equipment, and small 
or introducing a container deposit scheme) and processes for long term  the national waste strategy. This  recycling facilities to process wastes 
awareness raising and the need for infrastructure. Actions will be costed and  is particularly important for outer  such as organics, glass, plastics, fecal 
a timeline for implementation will be defined. islands such as Vava’u, Ha’apai  sludge treatment plant,and bulky items 
& ‘Eua as remoteness and low  (whitegoods, cars). The scope of work 
Supporting asset and capacity measures: Public consultations, social media 
population make waste interventions  will depend on the amount of funding 
outreach programs, training and workshops, community and council meetings.
expensive. Partnerships with tourism  secured. Efficient waste processing 
Location: All of Tonga.
operators will also be explored, where  will be facilitated by improved 
Timeline: Start implementing the national waste strategy by 2025. appropriate, to support improved  upstream management such as source 
Principles: These actions align with Core Values, in particular cooperating and  waste management. Funding could  segregation of various materials, which 
fulfillment of mutual obligations. be utilised for infrastructure such as  can be organised through community 
landfills, public bins, transfer stations,  waste management plans, partnerships 
Links to Second NDC: Indirect link to the target of expanding formal Waste 
septic beds and sewage treatment  with the private sector and improved 
collection.
ponds, as well as through long term  inter-island collaboration. Capacity and 
Links to other mitigation sectors: Potentially all sectors.
educational programs. Funding will be  infrastructure to process recyclables 
sought from the GCF for adaptation  and wastes that may be exported is 
projects such as climate proofing  also needed, (e-waste, whitegoods, 
More efficient data collection and consistent update 
landfills. cars and batteries), particularly as 
WASTE  of the database. Supporting asset and capacity  Pacific regional recycling initiatives 
ACTION 2 measures: Need for landfill sites,  progress.
GHG emissions reduction potential: Low, as this is an indirect action.  public bins, septic beds, transfer  Supporting asset and capacity 
However, accurate data will enable other actions to be developed and  stations and sewage treatment ponds  measures: Need to establish proper 
implemented. together with capacity building (e.g.  landfills rather than dumpsters, and 
for home composting) including  color-classify waste bags to facilitate 
Description: Reliable data is crucial to identify and improve weaknesses 
farmers, women’s groups and market  collection. Capacity measures are 
within the waste system. Data collection will be strengthened by installing 
vendors. needed for the whole population 
infrastructure (such as weighbridges at landfills), improving staff capacity 
(e.g. for conducting surveys), mapping out relevant stakeholders and by  Location: Vava’u, Ha’apai and ‘Eua. (government, private sector, general 
population).
improving cross ministerial collaboration. In addition, data processing  Timeline: 2021-2022 then on an as 
capacity will be enhanced by improving IT infrastructure (e.g. computers and  needed basis to enable implementation  Location: All of Tonga.
servers) and training data scientists. of the strategy and when funding  Timeline: All required infrastructure in 
Supporting asset and capacity measures: Maintenance of weighbridge at  opportunities arise. place by 2040.
the landfill; Improve and update computer technology at the landfill to record  Principles: Not provided. Principles: Autonomy and Culture.
data. Capacity building for government employees.
Links to Second NDC: Expanding the  Links to Second NDC: Expanding the 
Location: All of Tonga. formal Waste collection system. formal Waste collection system.
Timeline: This action is split into 3 phases: planning, trial and implementation  Links to other mitigation sectors:  Links to other mitigation sectors: 
(2021-2025). Data gathering and collation may leverage the waste survey to  None. Energy.
be conducted by the Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility in 2021-22. 
Principles: Not provided.
Links to Second NDC: Collection of relevant data on waste amounts and 
waste composition, as a prerequisite to identify a GHG emissions target for 
the sector in the 2025 NDC.
Links to other mitigation sectors: Potentially all sectors.
70 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 71
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSWASTE   WASTE   WASTE   WASTE  
ACTION 5  ACTION 6   ACTION 7   ACTION 8 
Educate and train  Unlearn old habits and  Increased use of local and  Biogas generators to fuel 
individuals on  teach healthy coexisting  recycled construction materials. villages; purchase best 
waste handling and  lifestyle to support short  equipment and technology 
GHG emissions reduction potential: Low - 
management. and long term training  for Waste sector; create waste 
Medium.
and public awareness on  disposal bins at village level.
Description: An increased use of low carbon 
GHG emissions reduction potential: 
waste. local construction materials and traditional 
Low, as this is an indirect action. 
knowledge will be investigated in consultation  GHG emissions reduction potential: Medium. 
However, it will enable other actions 
to be developed and implemented. GHG emissions reduction potential:  with stakeholders, including from the forestry,  Description: Organic waste from household, 
Low, as this is an indirect action.  agriculture, manufacturing, commerce, tourism  industry and agriculture can generate high 
Description: There is a need for  However, it will enable other actions  and building industries. In addition, increased  amounts of methane when treated or placed in 
education and training in conjunction  to be developed and implemented. use of recycled materials, such as bricks,  landfills. Waste such as pig manure, food waste, 
with other actions such as providing  concrete, timber and glass will be assessed for  fecal sludge and wastewater can be processed 
recycling bins and a separate  Description: Short and long term  technical and financial viability. This will include  to generate biogas. Biogas harvesting can 
collection system. With strong  awareness raising is key. A national  a review of the building code, developing  also be set up at a community level or as a 
leadership from government, private  education awareness plan (EAP)  guidelines and collaborating with neighboring  standalone industrial facility. Using compost 
sector and community/traditional  and waste communication strategy  countries on research and development. as a soil amendment returns valuable nutrients 
leaders, specific and targeted  will be developed and implemented. 
Supporting asset and capacity measures:  and carbon to land, while decreasing reliance 
training on waste segregation and  Including environmental concepts 
Greater production of local plant materials  on synthetic fertilisers which are polluting, 
classification will be provided to the  into the education curriculum and 
suitable as construction inputs (e.g. Bamboo,  unhealthy and expensive. While small scale 
broader community. This will include  training teachers will ensure long 
straw, other plants). Greater linkages to  options will continue to be encouraged in the 
training on e-waste, bulky waste and  term awareness among youth. It 
recycling of waste. Workforce training on the  short term, larger scale set ups will require 
handling toxic materials/medical  will also support the creation of a 
use of recycled/local material (e.g. TVET),  feasibility studies to assess technical and 
waste. Technical assistance can also  qualified workforce in required fields, 
production of guidelines. financial potential. Finally, an increase in use 
be provided to government staff,  including through Technical and 
of local food will reduce transport, packaging 
SMEs and businesses. Vocational Education and Training  Location: All of Tonga.
and food spoiling while supporting the local 
(TVET), such as environmentalists,  Timeline: 2030.
Supporting asset and capacity  economy.
data scientists, engineers 
measures: Equipment for households  Principles: Autonomy, Culture, Core Values, 
and lawyers. For the broader  Supporting asset and capacity measures: 
such as bins, and composting/biogas  Education, Environment, Inclusivity.
community, implementation of the  Feasibility studies before installing 
equipment. Training resources,  Links to Second NDC: Expanding the formal 
communication strategy through  infrastructure. Will require machinery for 
materials (e.g. instructions on bins,  Waste collection system.
events, community and religious  processing organic waste and better harvesting 
simple picture education signs) and 
leaders, social media, radio and  Links to other mitigation sectors: Human  local food production, training and capacity 
personnel to carry out training.
TV, will aim to change mindsets  Settlements, Transport. building on farming cultivation and livestock 
Location: All of Tonga, especially  on environmental issues and 3R  management.
outer islands.
principles over the long term. Location: All of Tonga: centralised on the main 
Timeline: Strategy in place by 2030. Supporting asset and capacity  island, decentralised on smaller islands.
Principles: Autonomy, Culture,  measures: Need for radio and  Timeline: Establishment of a biogas plant by 
Education. television programs, mass texts and  2030. Ongoing actions (2022-2040).
Links to Second NDC: Indirect link. jingles and short videos. Principles: Autonomy, Culture, Education, 
Links to other mitigation sectors:  Location: All of Tonga. Environment, Inclusivity.
Potentially all sectors. Timeline: Finalisation of the strategy  Links to Second NDC: Expanding the formal 
and EAP by 2023, then ongoing roll  Waste collection system.
out until 2040.
Links to other mitigation sectors: AFOLU, 
Principles: Education, Environment,  Energy, Transport.
Inclusivity.
Links to Second NDC: Indirect link.
Links to other mitigation sectors: 
Potentially all sectors.
72 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 73
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS3.5.3  Socio-economic and environmental considerations
Skills and  The need for skills and for capacity building is addressed in Action 5 ‘educate 
capacity  and train individuals’. Modifying the curriculum, including TVET, and training 
building needed teachers will encourage an increase in the skilled workforce for the long term. 
In the short term, targeted capacity building aimed at government officials 
and businesses can be impactful. Businesses can be made aware of their 
environmental obligations, while waste management businesses can receive 
technical assistance to operate equipment and in operation and maintenance 
of a landfill or transfer station. With continued donor support, SPREP can 
continue to build capacity for solid waste management as it is already doing 
through the J-PRISM II project. Train-the-trainer programs can be aimed at 
government officials; this will ensure they are better prepared to conduct 
environmental awareness activities among the general population and with 
businesses, for example on the need for source separation of waste. These 
officials can also be trained in obtaining and analysing data. Existing Tonga 
policies include JNAP2 - education for resilience target 16.
Cross-sectoral  Lack of environmental awareness at both community and business levels is 
considerations generally not limited to waste management. Awareness is also lacking in areas 
including energy efficiency, water conservation, climate change, forestry and 
land use. The development and implementation of a communication strategy, 
as outlined in Action 6, should therefore also encompass other sectors. 
Similarly, developing a data management system should encompass other 
sectors, as the lack of quality data is not specific to waste. Finally, Action 8, 
which targets organic waste, including growing locally and composting, has 
strong links with food security and the AFOLU sector.
Gender and  Action 3 proposes directly funding communities, especially on outer islands, 
social inclusion  while Action 7 and Action 8 have the strongest links to social inclusion, 
considerations aligning with the TSDF II which states that ‘Traditional societies produced 
limited waste and pollution, most of which was biodegradable. Modern 
trade and consumption generates vast amounts of waste that can easily 
lead to the pollution of our sensitive environment’. Action 7 and Action 8 
propose increasing the use of local materials and crops: the process would 
benefit from close consultation with local communities for their traditional 
knowledge and may eventually create opportunities for them.
The gender component should be carefully assessed, especially during 
the development of the waste management strategy and the EAP, to 
ensure women are appropriately represented during development and 
implementation of these plans.
Environmental  Environmental and social standards should be carefully considered when 
and social  establishing new waste management infrastructure, especially if it reaches 
safeguards  the industrial scale such as landfills, anaerobic digesters, composting and 
considerations crushing facilities. Emissions such as dust, odors, noise and contaminants 
must be carefully assessed and minimised with regard to local residents and 
the environment.
Key data gaps  Several assessments that have been conducted for the Waste sector in Tonga 
and solutions state that the level of data and information available to adequately assess 
the Waste sector is currently missing. This includes waste volumes, waste 
characterisation, and how waste is managed both at the landfill stage and 
outside of it. Without data, it is challenging to estimate greenhouse gases 
from waste on all of the islands, and to then determine actions required to 
address these emissions. Data is also crucial to assessing the financial viability 
of infrastructure. The Second NDC highlights this point and has mentioned 
prioritising data collection in the Waste sector for Tonga in the next five years.
Image: Women’s handicraft displays at the annual Royal 
Agricultural Show in Neiafu, Vava’u. Taken in 2019.
74 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS3.6 Human Settlements Relevant  The Tonga JNAP1 and JNAP2 consistently discuss these risks and the 
national  prioritisation of securing the safety of coastal communities. The focus on 
policies,  enhancing resilience is further emphasised in the National Infrastructure 
sectoral policies  Investment Plan, though the plan does not explicitly prioritise coastal 
3.6.1  Context
and links with  infrastructure or the built environment. The Second NDC submitted by Tonga 
the LT-LEDS emphasises the need for coastal management and flood management to 
Introduction address sea level rise. The World Bank supported the establishment of the Road 
Maintenance Fund in 2013, though there is a need to supplement the scope of 
Tonga consists of 170 islands, with less than 45 of these 
the fund to ensure adequate coverage of road networks across the islands. 
islands inhabited. Most Tongan islands are low-lying, 
making communities extremely vulnerable to flooding  The Third National Communication (to UNFCCC) also describes the 
due to rising sea levels and storm surges. These effects  importance of timely maintenance and rehabilitation of road infrastructure to 
are becoming more frequent as the climate warms.  ensure all-weather access and as a means of job creation in Tonga. Climate-
Coastal flooding damages buildings and endangers  resilient buildings and infrastructure are also prioritised in the NDC as a 
human lives. Furthermore, droughts and increased  key adaptation measure to climate change impacts. The Building Control 
freshwater extraction endanger community groundwater  and Standards Act is in the process of integrating updated specifications 
supplies from saltwater intrusion. Urban areas in Tonga  to account for increasingly intense weather events and wind loads. After 
often experience flooding due to the lack of stormwater  the 2020 cyclone season caused significant building damage, building 
management infrastructure. Hence there is strong  audits have commenced to assess the suitability of safe assembly points for 
reasoning for the integration of stormwater drainage with  evacuation in preparation for the next cyclone season. 
the road network in urban areas, to prevent or reduce 
flooding. 
Responsible  The Ministry of Infrastructure (MOI) oversees the maintenance, design and 
The inclusion of Human Settlements as a sector in the  Ministries  planning of road networks across the islands. MOI is also responsible for 
LT-LEDS planning is to enhance the complementarity  and sector  building standards and regulations, leading the process for updating the 
of plans with other sectors rather than the potential for  stakeholders Building Code and developing capacity to fully implement it. The National 
greenhouse gas emission reduction.  Emergency Management Office (NEMO) coordinates planning for disaster-
response, including assessing evacuation routes and safe assembly points. 
Historical and  Buildings and infrastructure are not a major source of greenhouse gas 
current GHG  emissions in Tonga. They are, however, identified as a critical part of adapting 
emissions to climate change impacts such as sea level rise and increasingly powerful 
winds and storms. Additionally, efforts are being made to reduce energy 
consumption in buildings through improving energy efficiency of appliances 
and building envelopes. The inclusion of the Human Settlements sub-chapter 
in LT-LEDS reiterates Tonga’s commitment to a comprehensive low emission 
development trajectory.
Current  The Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility is supporting the Government of 
initiatives Tonga to develop the Tonga National Infrastructure Investment Plan 2020-
2030 (NIIP-3). The NIIP-3 will support improved screening and prioritising 
infrastructure projects for resource allocation for projects. In 2018, the World 
Bank approved a US$26 million grant to improve climate resilience of Tonga’s 
land, sea and air transport infrastructure. This includes the integration of 
storm drains and road upgrades on major islands. Municipal infrastructure 
in Nuku’alofa has been upgraded through the recently completed US$14.6 
million Nuku’alofa Urban Development Sector Project, funded by the Asian 
Development Bank (ADB) and the Australian Government. 
For coastal protection, the ADB is financing the US$19.25 million Tonga 
Climate Resilience Sector Project which includes the installation of 8km 
of soft and hard coastal infrastructure to protect against storm surges. In 
addition, the Integrated Urban Resilience Sector Project, jointly funded 
by the ADB and the Australian Government, addresses institutional and 
infrastructure gaps for flood prevention on Nuku’alofa. A coalition led by the 
United Nations Development Program, including the Tongan Government, 
SPREP, New Zealand MFAT and research institutions, is developing a 
US$40 million proposal to the GCF. This would cover construction of 
Image: Flooding of a local residence at Fasi, Tongatapu after TC Gita. Taken in 2018.
coastal protection in Tongatapu, Vava’u and Ha’apai and enhancing disaster 
monitoring capabilities. 
76 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 77
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSHUMAN SETTLEMENTS
Sector Pathway Actions Over Time 3.6.2  Sector Pathways
1 4 7 The Human Settlements vision is: In the Human Settlements group, the inclusion of all 
parts of the Tongan population in the development of 
Inclusive development through life  Water security in all islands as a DRR  Increase finance, resource and  ‘Building a resilient  the nation was identified as a top priority. This requires 
skills program measure capacity building for education to 
concerted efforts to map all vulnerable groups and 
PRINCIPLES PRINCIPLES  build a knowledge based society and autonomous Tonga 
means to engage them in capacity development to 
Traditional Knowledge, Education,  Inclusivity, Environment, Education, Culture  PRINCIPLES  through transformation 
Environment & Culture & Autonomy Education improve livelihoods and early warnings in the event of 
and strengthening of all  disasters. The emphasis on inclusive development is 
2 5 8 reflected in almost all prioritised actions in this pathway.
sectors.’
Implement disaster risk financing  Improve the climate resilience of  Increase access to financing for 
strategy to manage funds  housing and buildings, retrofitting to  storm water management and road 
during disaster response so that  withstand high winds and damaging  design by the MOI
communities can access climate  cyclones PRINCIPLES 
resilient infrastructure PRINCIPLES Autonomy
PRINCIPLES Environment, Inclusivity, Traditional 
Education, Environment, Inclusivity, Culture  Knowledge, Culture, Autonomy, Education 
& Traditional Knowledge & Core Values
3 6 9
Engage with donors and partners  Sustainable tourism in Tonga Strengthen and refine current policy 
to source funds for infrastructure  PRINCIPLES  on coastal protection in order to 
management and design, particularly  Education & Environment strengthen Marine Protected Areas
on stormwater management and  PRINCIPLES 
road design Environment
PRINCIPLES 
Core Values, Education, Environment & 
Inclusivity
Trainings for care of coastal areas 
9
POLICY & WORKFORCE
Pathway 
Infrastructure upgrades for sustainable tourism 
6 description
WORKFORCE
Road Committee established & Road Maintenance Fund operational 
HUMAN   Inclusive development through life skills program. 
3
FINANCING
SETTLEMENTS  
Implement financing strategy for communities to access climate resilient infrastructure  ACTION 1  GHG emissions reduction potential: This action does not have direct GHG 
2
FINANCING reduction potential. There may be indirect contributions to GHG emission 
reductions.
UNDERWAY SHORT TERM MEDIUM TERM LONG TERM
Description: Engage all facets of society in the sustainable development 
of Tonga. This requires extensive consultations to identify all groups with 
Trainings for personnel in sustainable tourism sector  different vulnerabilities and needs. Training programs need to be tailored 
6
WORKFORCE for groups with consideration given to distinct constraints and capacities. 
These groups include women, youth, elderly, persons with disability 
Undertake research for vulnerable shorelines 
9 and communities living in remote islands. Skills training and networking 
POLICY
opportunities enhance the security of livelihoods for the people of Tonga. 
Road designs adjusted to include stormwater drain 
This action further requires policies and resources to support improved 
3 8
FINANCING
access to markets for the sale and exchange of products.
Enhance water security in all islands 
Supporting asset and capacity measures: Training materials and equipment 
4
POLICY e.g. home gardening equipment. 
Improve climate resilience of housing & buildings  Location: Urban areas, unused land.
5
POLICY & FINANCING
Timeline: This action will commence in the short term, after community 
Inclusive development through life skills program  outreach officers are trained and training materials developed. It is 
1 WORKFORCE anticipated that actions in this area will be required up to the long term. 
Increase finance, resource & capacity building for a knowledge-based society  Principles: This action is highly aligned to Inclusivity and aligned with 
7 WORKFORCE & FINANCING Traditional Knowledge, Education, Environment and Culture.
Links to Second NDC: None.
Links to other mitigation sectors: AFOLU – Gardening and agricultural 
products are the primary source of economic output at the household level.
TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 79
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSHUMAN   HUMAN   HUMAN   HUMAN  
SETTLEMENTS  SETTLEMENTS  SETTLEMENTS  SETTLEMENTS
ACTION 2  ACTION 3   ACTION 4   ACTION 5  
 
Implement a disaster  Engage with donors  Water security in all  Improve the climate 
risk financing strategy  and partners to source  islands as a disaster risk  resilience of housing and 
to manage funds during  funds for infrastructure  reduction measure. buildings, retrofitting to 
disaster response so  management and  withstand high winds and 
GHG emissions reduction potential: 
that communities can  design, particularly on  damaging cyclones.
This action does not contribute to 
access climate resilient  stormwater management  GHG reduction.  
infrastructure. and road design. Description: Enhance water security  GHG emissions reduction potential: 
in all inhabited islands of Tonga. This  This action does not contribute to 
would require the development of an  GHG reduction but could contribute 
GHG emissions reduction potential:  GHG emissions reduction potential: 
integrated water management plan  to protection of low emission 
This action does not contribute  This action does not contribute to 
with specific considerations around  infrastructure assets.
directly to GHG reduction.   GHG reduction but could contribute 
the availability of groundwater in  Description: Improve resilience of 
Description: Ensure access to climate  to protection of low emission 
each island. Sensitisation to water  housing and buildings to increasingly 
resilient community infrastructure  infrastructure assets.  
containment and treatment methods  intense winds and storms through 
during emergencies. Complementing  Description: Integrate stormwater 
needs to be conducted for all  retrofits. An enhanced building 
the priorities in JNAP2, access to  drainage infrastructure into urban 
communities, with a focus on remote  code has been validated with 
climate resilient assembly points  road network and implement 
islands. Groundwater measurement,  industry and needs to be adopted 
needs to be connected with Village  maintenance regime to enhance 
as recognised in previous surveys, is  as policy. Systematic capacity 
Emergency Management Plans.  longevity of infrastructure. The 
an important feature for improving  building for public and private 
Facility and access upgrades need  action requires the systematic 
water management and security.  sector stakeholders will be needed 
to be undertaken, as informed by  integration of stormwater planning in 
Supporting asset and capacity  on adoption of the updated code. 
the NEMO audit. The Shelter Cluster,  the design and construction of roads 
measures: Rainwater catchment  Materials standardisation and 
consisting of all stakeholders in  and pavements in urban areas. This 
tanks, community reservoirs,  certification is needed for code 
disaster response, can contribute by  complements the Road Maintenance 
emergency water purification kits,  implementation. Financing will 
sharing communication networks  Fund established in 2013. Technical 
solar desalination plants, awareness  also be needed to support existing 
to disseminate timely information  support to enhance the work of the 
raising on communal water  buildings through necessary retrofits 
during emergencies.  National Spatial Planning Agency 
management.  to withstand anticipated loading. 
Supporting asset and capacity  Office (NSPAO) and the Road 
measures: Improve remote sensing  Committee will be needed.  Location: Tongatapu, outer islands. Supporting asset and capacity 
measures: Suitable materials 
capabilities, communications and  Supporting asset and capacity  Timeline: This action will be 
and capacity development for 
evacuation networks. measures: Install and maintain  implemented in the short to medium 
compliance to an upgraded Building 
Location: All islands. stormwater management  term. Code. Production capacity to 
infrastructure.  Principles: This action is very aligned 
Timeline: Implementation of this  produce suitable wood-based 
action is already underway, with  Location: Urban areas. with Inclusivity. It also aligns with  materials locally. 
Environment, Education, Culture and 
NEMO auditing suitable evacuation  Timeline: Road Committee has been  Location: Throughout the Kingdom. 
Autonomy. 
centres in preparation for the next  established and Road Maintenance 
Timeline: Activities in the action will 
cyclone season.  Fund is operational. Over the short  Links to Second NDC: None.
be implemented over the short and 
Principles: This action is highly  to medium term, road designs to  Links to other mitigation sectors:  medium term. 
aligned to Education, Environment,  be adjusted to include stormwater  Energy - where it may be needed to 
Principles: This action is well aligned 
Inclusivity and Culture and aligned  drains.  power water supply and treatment 
with all the Tongan principles.
with Traditional Knowledge. Principles: This action is aligned to  systems.
Links to Second NDC: None.
Links to Second NDC: None. Core Values, Education, Environment 
and Inclusivity. Links to other mitigation sectors: 
Links to other mitigation sectors: All 
Energy – The updated Building 
sectors. Links to Second NDC: None.
Code pending adoption improves 
Links to other mitigation sectors: 
the energy efficiency of building 
Transport – The reduction of flooding 
envelopes and appliances, while 
enhances land-based transportation.
enhancing structural adequacy. 
80 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 81
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSHUMAN   HUMAN   HUMAN   HUMAN  
SETTLEMENTS  SETTLEMENTS SETTLEMENTS  SETTLEMENTS 
ACTION 6  ACTION 7  ACTION 8  ACTION 9 
 
Sustainable tourism in Tonga. Increase finance, resource and  Increase access to financing for  Strengthen and refine current 
capacity building for education  storm water management and  policy on coastal protection 
GHG reduction potential: Low to Medium.
to build a knowledge based  road design by the MOI.  in order to strengthen Marine 
Description: In anticipation of post-pandemic 
economic recovery, Tonga aims to promote  society. Protected Areas.
GHG Reduction Potential: This action does 
sustainable tourism as a form of income 
not have direct GHG reduction potential. There 
generation. This includes putting in place  GHG Reduction Potential: This action does  GHG Reduction Potential: Low to Medium.
may be indirect contributions to GHG emission 
tourist taxes which can then be channeled  not have direct GHG reduction potential. There  Description: In line with climate change policy 
reductions.
toward low emissions development and climate  may be indirect contributions to GHG emission  calling for coastal protection, this action 
change adaptation measures in the tourism  reductions. Description: While the Road Maintenance Fund  prioritises the use of nature-based solutions for 
industry as well as promoting nature-based  Description: With disruptions to face to face  is operational and major defects and damages  protection against storm surges and erosion. 
infrastructure solutions. Training programs  gatherings increasingly possible (from global  to road infrastructure are being repaired and  This entails leveraging traditional knowledge 
will be organised to improve hospitality skills  pandemics to natural disasters), Tonga is  rectified, there is a need for more systematic  in plant selection for restoration of mangroves 
among the workforce while mainstreaming  exploring mechanisms to ensure the continuity  monitoring and maintenance of transportation  and replanting of foreshores. Restoration 
knowledge on sustainable tourism. Upgrades  of quality education throughout any events.  assets in Tongatapu and beyond. Training for  of mangroves, replanting and general 
to telecommunications and transport  This will require significant financial resources  staff and the public to monitor and report  strengthening of the coastal ecosystem will 
infrastructure and vehicles/vessels while  to set up adequate communication channels in  defects for timely repairs as well as resourcing  also have positive GHG emission sequestration 
integrating renewable energy and energy  the outer islands and to ensure students have  local teams to carry out regular maintenance  outcomes although these cannot be quantified 
efficiency, will benefit both tourists and the  access to required equipment and materials  works can extend the lifespan of road  at the present time. Where vegetation is 
local population as it reduces the carbon  when schools are not operating. This action  infrastructure at lower cost.  inadequate for blocking storm surges and 
footprint of the tourism sector.  also calls for a review of the curriculum, to  Supporting asset and capacity measures:  sea level rise, revetments and seawalls may 
Supporting asset and capacity measures:  increase environmental awareness and disaster  Costed maintenance plan for all public  be needed to protect communities from the 
Telecommunications and tourism infrastructure  preparedness through education. Consideration  infrastructure. surrounding ocean incursions. Assessments 
including nature-based solutions, renewable  should be given to student loans to support  Location: Tongatapu, ‘Eua, Ha’apai, Vava’u,  and feasibility studies need to be conducted in 
and energy efficiency technologies, fuel  vocational and tertiary education in particular.  Niuas. each case to determine the most appropriate 
efficient/low emissions vehicles and vessels,  Teachers will have to undergo training to equip  Timeline: None. modality for coastal protection. 
monitoring systems, early warning systems. them with the skills to conduct lessons through  Supporting asset and capacity measures: 
Principles: Autonomy.
Location: Remote islands. new mediums. This action links with the Tonga  Coastal replanting and seawall construction.
Links to Second NDC: None.
Timeline: Training programs for personnel in  Accelerate Resilience Program and links  Location: Fanga’uta Lagoon Coastal Areas and 
the tourism sector are planned for the short  students with employment after completion of  Links to other mitigation sectors: Transport  Tongatapu.
their studies.   – Road infrastructure on larger islands will be 
term while infrastructure upgrades will follow in  Timeline: In the short term, research needs 
regularly maintained.
the medium term. Supporting asset and capacity measures:  to be undertaken to determine the required 
Principles: This action is well aligned with  Upgraded school buildings and facilities, more  intervention for each of the vulnerable 
Education and Environment. training for teachers. shorelines, especially those closer to more 
Location: Throughout the country. populated areas. Over the medium to longer 
Links to Second NDC: None.
Timeline: This action requires implementation  term, training for local communities, students 
Links to other mitigation sectors: Transport – 
from short to medium and long term. The  and public officials for the protection and care 
land, sea and air transportation infrastructure 
initial focus is on low-income households, with  of coastal areas will be conducted.  
within and between islands will be upgraded. 
support expanded to all teachers and students  Principles: Environment.
over time.    Links to Second NDC: Planting one million 
Principles: This action is well aligned with  trees by 2023 and prevention of any 
Education. permanent loss of land to rising sea levels on 
Links to Second NDC: None. Tonga’s four main islands.
Links to other mitigation sectors: All sectors. Links to other mitigation sectors: AFOLU 
– Coastal mangroves contribute to carbon 
sequestration while protecting the coast from 
erosion.
82 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 83
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS 3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONS3.6.3  Socio-economic and environmental considerations
Skills and  Training and capacity building have been identified as a first step in almost all 
capacity  the actions for Human Settlements. There is a shortage of technical expertise 
building needed locally to maintain and upgrade the infrastructure systems and technologies 
that have been imported. External skills can be brought in periodically from 
within the region to upskill technical professionals in Tonga. At the same 
time, traditional knowledge in agriculture, water management and coastal 
protection can be mobilised to ensure solutions pursued are sustainable and 
locally appropriate.  
Cross-sectoral  The Human Settlements pathway is an enabling pathway, not limited to a 
considerations specific sector. However, it brings together diverse aspects where concerted 
effort is required to ensure the wellbeing and livelihoods of Tongans in the 
wake of climate change impacts and economic development. The actions 
identified in this pathway intersect with Energy, Transport and AFOLU, and 
cross-sectoral collaboration can deliver optimal outcomes and mobilise 
external support, both in the form of technical assistance and financial support. 
Gender and  Actions in this pathway have a strong focus on enhancing resilience, 
social inclusion  particularly to climate-induced impacts. These affect different groups in 
considerations  the population differently and substantial discussion has revolved around 
identifying the various forms of vulnerability that must be included in national 
and local planning. Gender, youth, disability, poverty, and remote locations 
are some of the factors that will require particular attention in the allocation 
of resources and planning for the actions listed in this pathway. Planning with 
vulnerability and social inclusion at the forefront of considerations will lead 
to more equitable outcomes to the actions taken to enhance the resilience of 
the country.  
Environmental  Measures to enhance resilience to disasters require stakeholders to be able 
and social  to firstly, receive the information and then, to take action on warnings or 
safeguards  information. Training and capacity building programs must not exacerbate 
considerations social inequalities. Infrastructure upgrades and construction projects should 
be informed by comprehensive environmental impact assessments, to 
understand whether such projects would have wider impacts on local flora 
and fauna.
Key data gaps  Audit of community facilities has commenced in preparation for evacuation 
and solutions and assembly during disasters. Systematic building audits to determine 
which and to what extent each building needs to be retrofitted to withstand 
cyclones is the next urgent task, to guide resource mobilisation and 
distribution. A market study can be commissioned to determine the building 
materials available in Tonga, and how they meet requirements in the Building 
Code. It is essential the same level of attention is paid to buildings in less 
populated islands, to consistently ensure safe spaces for shelter during 
disasters. 
Similarly for road infrastructure, a nationwide audit of the road network, 
condition of roads and stormwater drains will provide the first step towards 
developing a systematic road network maintenance and development 
framework. Traffic studies should be commissioned in urban areas to 
determine the adequacy of the network to traffic volumes and inform 
network expansion. 
Image (opposite page): Niutao Project seawall 
construction in progress from Navutoka to Talafo’ou, 
Tongatapu. Taken in 2021.
84 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050
3 KEY LONG-TERM CLIMATE ACTIONSMAJOR 
4
LT-LEDS First Steps
FIRST STEPS
Through the LT-LEDS development, Tongan stakeholders contributed and 
shaped the vision for:
A low emissions Tonga, where all sectors work together 
to create resilience, autonomy and self-reliance. 
Through this process, stakeholders developed, revised and assessed possible 
near term steps that will advance Tonga towards this vision. They identified 
nine first steps as priorities, to implement the LT-LEDS. In no particular order 
these are: 
•  Loan program for low energy buildings
•  Standardising lighting power consumption for buildings by 2025
•  Low emission vehicles: government to pilot electric vehicles
•  Develop a waste communication strategy 
•  Strengthen existing transport policies
•  Mainstreaming important low emission policy elements into relevant 
ministries
These priority 
•  Promote Best Practices in agriculture, forestry and fisheries  steps are 
described 
•  Develop and implement a national waste policy for Tonga
further in this 
•  Pedestrianising Nuku’alofa by 2022 chapter.
Image: A view of surrounding islands 
from Mt. Talau, Vava’u. Taken in 2020.
TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 87
4 MAJOR FIRST STEPSLoan program  LT-LEDS stakeholders prioritised a loan program for  The standardisation of lighting power consumption 
businesses to improve their building’s energy efficiency,  should be the responsibility of Tonga Power Limited, MOI, 
for low energy  replicating similar government programs provided in  the Tonga Electricity Commission and MEIDECC, and 
the agricultural sector. This step intersects with other  mainly the Department of Energy. State partners include 
buildings intervention actions from the Energy, AFOLU and Human  the MLNR, while non-state partners include contractors, 
Settlements sectors with energy efficiency; low emissions,  building electrical contractors, architects and engineers. 
low cost, and retrofitting of houses and other structures 
This step should commence in 2022, with internal 
to withstand high winds and damaging cyclones. 
stakeholder consultations between MOI, Tonga Power 
The development of this loan program should be  Limited, Department of Energy and the Electricity 
undertaken by government and businesses, with support  Commission. This should be followed by public 
from village and community scale actors. It should be  consultations on the draft policy over the next two to two 
led by the Ministry of Infrastructure (MOI), Ministry of  and a half years, aiming for cabinet approval in 2024, and 
Lands and Natural Resources (MLNR), DCC, Department  implementation in 2025.
of Environment, Department of Energy (DOE) and Tonga 
This step aligns with the Tongan principles of 
Power Limited (TPL). Other key stakeholders include 
Environment, Education, Inclusivity and Autonomy. 
the construction sector, donors and NGOs, producers 
This step will help reduce the cost of living by reducing 
and makers like hardware stores such as EM Jones and 
electricity bills. Through the installation of energy 
electrical companies such as JH Electrical. 
efficient lighting, it will bring Affordable and clean 
Users of energy efficient buildings include the general  energy (SDG7), Decent work and economic growth 
public, schools and government, essential buildings and  (SDG8), Industry innovation and infrastructure (SDG9), 
businesses such as resorts. This step should incorporate  Sustainable cities and communities (SDG11), Responsible 
the development lead designs for the most energy efficient  consumption and production (SDG12), and Climate action 
buildings suitable for Tonga and follow with energy  (SDG13). The step affects the National Building Code, 
performance audits and the management of change.   which is currently being reviewed, along with energy 
policies and the TSDF II. 
This step should be implemented in percentages of 
building stock that are energy efficient. Stakeholders 
suggested these percentages would be achieved by 30 
percent of buildings being energy efficient by 2030, 60 
Low emission  Piloting of electric vehicles (EVs) in the government fleet 
percent by 2040 and 100 percent by 2050. 
is a priority to support implementation of the LT-LEDS. 
This step aligns with the Tongan principles of  vehicles:  It intersects with other intervention actions to manage 
Environment, Education, Inclusivity and Autonomy. It  energy demand, low emissions, low cost and road design. 
would bring positive social, technical and environmental  government to 
This pilot will be led by the GOT, MOI, and in particular, 
impacts, contributing to Tonga’s achievement of good 
the Department of Environment, Climate Change and 
health and wellbeing (SDG3), quality education and  pilot electric 
Energy. Other partners would include TPL, engineering 
training for building retrofits (SDG4), gender equality 
firms, car dealers and electrical contractors. In terms 
(SDG5), affordable and clean energy (SDG7), decent  vehicles
of producers and makers, EVs could be supplied from 
work through retrofitting (SDG8), new industry, 
Japan, Korea, China and the US. This step will start 
innovation and infrastructure sectors within the Tongan 
with a proposal to be developed by 2022 for funding 
economy (SDG9), sustainable cities and communities 
consideration, with the aim that, by 2027, 100 percent of 
(SDG11), responsible consumption and productivity 
the government fleet are EVs. 
(SDG12), climate action (SDG13), life on land (SDG15) 
and partnerships (SDG17). This step aligns with existing  This step aligns with the Tongan principles of 
policies of TSDF II, TCCP, NIIP2, and TERM+.  environment, education, and inclusivity. It is expected 
to have a social and technical impact, contributing to 
Tonga’s SDG fulfillment, particularly on in training and 
quality education (SDG4), affordable and clean energy 
Standardising  The LT-LEDS prioritised the standardisation of lighting  (SDG7), support to energy efficient transport and 
power consumption for buildings in Tonga by 2025.  therefore industry, innovation and infrastructure (SDG9), 
lighting power  It is likely this step could affect how buildings will be  sustainable cities and communities (SDG11), climate 
designed in Tonga as we move towards more energy  action (SDG13), life on land (SDG15) and partnerships 
consumption for  efficient designs for buildings, both in private and  (SDG17). The existing policies include: TSDF II, TCCP, 
commercial sectors. It may also lead to behavioural  JNAP2, Second NDC, ministries corporate plans, 
buildings by 2025 impacts in the way people consume energy, in terms  procurement plan and TERM-PLUS.
of both power and lighting. This would bring social, 
technical and financial benefits as the community saves 
more on their electricity bills.
88 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 89
4 MAJOR FIRST STEPS 4 MAJOR FIRST STEPSDevelop a waste  The LT-LEDS also prioritises the development of a  It is hoped that strengthened policy will prompt 
waste communication strategy and implementation of a  importers and suppliers to import and supply vehicles, 
communication  national education awareness plan by 2025. It is expected  airplanes or boats that follow the standards and the 
to draw on complementary intervention actions to  policy. As users are public consumers, monitoring and 
strategy develop a communication strategy around waste, waste  assessment of this step would occur through conducting 
segregation, waste handling and management; threading  surveys and audits with the public, to test policy 
these together with capacity building and education.  effectiveness. The timeline for implementation is for the 
stocktake, gap analysis and alignment of policies to be 
This strategy will be developed by the government, 
complete by 2023. By 2025, the responsible entity will, if 
in particular the Department of Environment within 
required, then create integrated laws or frameworks for 
MEIDECC, and the Waste Authority Limited. Other 
land, air and sea transport, with parliamentary approval 
state partners will be engaged, including the Ministry 
by 2028. Implementation can commence from 2031 
of Education, Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Police, 
onwards and will be reviewed in 2035 to measure the 
the Ministry of Finance (MOF), TSD, Ministry of Internal 
degree of implementation and impact. 
Affairs (MIA) and also the Prime Minister’s Office 
(PMO). The step will also utilise non-state partners  This step aligns with Tongan principles of Culture, 
for information dissemination such as the Tonga  Environment and Inclusivity. Tonga has a culture of social 
Broadcasting Commission, radio and TV communities  and church functions which are important and should 
and the churches.  be considered when designing transport policies i.e. the 
priority of church functions when arranging inter-island 
For implementation, 2021-2022 will be used for planning, 
transport. The most relevant SDGs this will contribute 
followed by the development of a EAP, establishment of a 
to are Affordable and clean energy (SDG7) and Climate 
waste committee and identification of stakeholders over 
action (SDG13). The step aligns with Tonga’s Second NDC 
2022-23. Final review and securing funding is planned for 
target for low transport emissions. The TSDF II, which 
2023 with implementation commencing in 2024 and a 
covers all governmental sectors and sector plans, and 
review and lessons learnt process one year after. 
corporate plans, will be related to the transport policy 
This is aligned with the Tongan principles of Environment,  created through this step.
Education, Inclusivity, Culture and Autonomy. This step 
will require support from technical, policy, workforce 
and financing avenues. For behaviour, the step aims to 
change mindsets and produce positive social changes  Mainstreaming  LT-LEDS stakeholders recognised the need to 
through involvement from the public. The step will  mainstream the following intervention actions into 
contribute to the following SDGs: Quality education  important  the relevant ministries: energy efficiency, renewable 
(SDG4), Responsible consumption and production  energy and low emissions vehicles. This step is linked to 
(SDG12), Climate action (SDG13), Life below water  low emission  the Alamea policy (see cross-cultural considerations), 
(SDG14) and Life on land (SDG15). This step maps  with priority given to identification of gaps in policy, 
Tonga’s TSDF II, Climate Change Policy and JNAP2. policy elements  duplication of policy, lack of enforcement and the need 
to connect policies across sectors where relevant. 
into relevant 
This mainstreaming should be owned by the DOE, TPL 
and the broader government, with support from donors 
Strengthen  The LT-LEDS stakeholders prioritised the need for an  ministries
like GCF, ADB and New Zealand’s MFAT. The time-
inclusive and holistic policy that strengthens land, air 
frame to implement the step is by 2025, in accordance 
existing transport  and sea transport, to support sustainability and lower 
with targets already published in the TEEMP, JNAP2, 
emissions. This will entail a stocktake of existing policies, 
the Second NDC - in 2030 to achieve 70 percent of RE 
policies followed by a gap analysis on existing policies and their 
and 100 percent in 2035 and moving forward for 2050 
implementation. The next step will be seeking to align 
emission from Tonga will be 0 percent.
policies across sectors, to address the gaps. Policies will 
align with multiple other sector intervention actions.  This step aligns to Tongan principles of education, 
Under Waste, regulations for waste and disposal of  environment and inclusivity. It will contribute to the 
transport technology need to be considered, along with  following SDGs: Good Health and Well-being (SDG3), 
urban infrastructure and design of bridges and roads. For  Quality Education (SDG4), Gender Equality (SDG5), 
Energy, this step will support low GHG emissions. There  Affordable and Clean Energy (SDG7), Industry, Innovation 
are also links with the transport of AFOLU products  and Infrastructure (SDG9), Sustainable Cities and 
and transport actions relating to tariffs, taxes, electric  Communities (SDG11), Responsible Consumption and 
vehicles, maintenance overhaul and services.  Production (SDG12) and Climate Action (SDG13). 
This holistic policy will be owned by the MOI who will 
work with other state ministries creating related transport 
policies, industry, also other state partners like public 
enterprises or other bodies such as Tonga Airports Ltd. 
Non-state partners are donors (ADB, Australia, MFAT) who 
could help fund the strengthening of existing transport 
policies and provide support through technical assistance. 
90 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 91
4 MAJOR FIRST STEPS 4 MAJOR FIRST STEPSPromote Best  LT-LEDS will prioritise the promotion of climate smart  schools. Producers and makers include MORC, who 
agriculture, agroforestry systems and traditional fishing  are responsible for borders, and importing of waste 
Practices in  practices. An example is increasing awareness of  like plastic. Implementation will occur over the next 
subsistence farmers to understand the importance of the  ten years, with 2021-2022 as a planning phase. This will 
Agriculture,  agroforestry system and how the achievement of low  be followed by data collection, reviewing reports and 
emissions can include practices like mixed cropping. For  analysing data in 2023-2024. Based on this timeline, the 
Forestry and  farmers this might involve a return to traditional fishing  National Waste Policy will be developed in 2025 followed 
using the lunar calendar.  by implementation, review in 2027 and incorporation of 
Fisheries  lessons learned in 2030. 
These best practices will be promoted by the agriculture 
sector, fisheries sectors and the forestry sector. The state  This step is aligned with Tongan principles of 
partners are MAFF, MOF, Ministry of Fisheries and all  Environment, Inclusivity, Education, Culture and 
other line ministries, such as MEIDECC. Efforts will be  Autonomy. It will also contribute to Good health and 
made to use existing mechanisms, such as the Ministry  wellbeing (SDG 3), Sustainable cities and communities 
of Agriculture’s annual production survey and monitoring  (SDG 11), Responsible consumption and production (SDG 
of SMAs and MPAs. The non-state partners are donors,  12), Climate Action (SDG 13), Life below water (SDG 
agencies, local NGOs such as Live & Learn, MORDI Tonga  14), and Life on land (SDG 15). This step will contribute 
Trust etc and private sectors. This step will also target  to Tonga’s Second NDC, existing Waste and Litter 
producers or makers, the farmers and the fisherfolk.  regulations, JNAP2.
Implementation will start with planning and fundraising 
activities, with the aim that by 2028 capacity building 
and community awareness raising will be underway, 
along with the establishment of implementation areas.  Pedestrianising  In order to support LT-LEDS implementation, 
This step has a 50 percent implementation target by  stakeholders prioritised the pedestrianisation of 
2035, 75 percent by 2042 and 100 percent by 2050.  Nuku’alofa by  Nuku’alofa urban area by 2022, aligning with intervention 
actions in the Human Settlements sector pathway, 
This step aligns with the Tongan principles of 
2022 transport actions such as road maintenance and energy, 
environment, education, inclusivity and culture. It will 
through street lighting. 
contribute to Tonga’s development through No poverty 
(SDG1), Zero hunger (SDG2), Good health and well- This pedestrianisation will be led by the NSPAO as 
being (SDG3), Gender equality (SDG5), Decent work and  a division under MLNR, MOI, the Ministry of Police, 
economic growth (SDG8), Climate action (SDG13), Life  and Ministry of Health. Other partners include NGOs, 
on the water (SDG14) and Life on land (SDG15). The step  MOT, communities, churches, urban businesses and 
maps to existing Tongan policies, including the Second  public enterprises. This step will be implemented over 
NDC (Forestry Target = 1 millions trees by 2023) and the  2022, starting with a draft policy, consultation with 
TASP, TFSP, and National Forest Policy. urban communities, then cabinet approval followed by 
implementation and enforcement. 
This step aligns with all six Tongan principles: 
Environment, Education, Inclusivity, Autonomy, Culture, 
Develop and  The LT-LEDS will be supported by the development and 
Core Values, and will contribute to nearly all SDGs. 
implementation of a national waste policy for Tonga by 
This step maps to Tonga’s Public Health Act, Non 
implement a  2025. In doing so this step will draw upon intervention 
Communicable Disease strategy, TSDF II, Nuku’alofa 
actions of a feasibility study, identifying stakeholders 
Greater Urban Structure Plan and the NIIP II.
National Waste  and gaps, national awareness, developing a national 
waste strategy and collecting waste data. A feasibility 
Policy for Tonga study will identify gaps and the current situation, in 
order to identify entry points that can be strengthened. 
These will provide the foundations of the National 
Waste Policy. National awareness aims to increase 
participation, inclusivity, ownership and buy-in from the 
public, for more effective implementation and support. 
The collection of accurate waste data will support 
the preparation, operation and future planning of the 
National Waste Strategy, allowing for further information 
for revision and tracking of progress. 
Ownership over this policy will be with the DOE and 
Waste Authority Limited, working with other state 
partners in the PMO (to develop the policy), Ministry of 
Health (for data), TSD (for data), MLNR, and Ministry 
of Internal Affairs (MIA) (awareness raising). Non-state 
partners include church leaders, private businesses and 
92 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 93
4 MAJOR FIRST STEPS 4 MAJOR FIRST STEPSDeeply rooted policy change
Cross-Sectoral Measures
Good quality data and community education are needed to understand 
policy changes brought about by the LT-LEDs. This could be achieved 
In addition to sectoral interventions outlined in Chapter 3, successful 
through the establishment of a data policy to enable the collection of 
reduction in GHG emissions requires the consideration of cross-sectoral 
good quality data which can then inform better decision making. Further 
measures to drive comprehensive climate action across multiple sectors. 
conducting awareness raising initiatives that use community-friendly 
Tongan stakeholders identified five cross-sectoral considerations essential 
language will support the implementation of any new policies resulting from 
to support the implementation of interventions mentioned under Chapter 3. 
the LT-LEDS. Data collection and community awareness will benefit all sector 
These cross-sectoral considerations are underpinned by the need for:
intervention actions. 
•  Capacity building through education, particularly in relation to any 
In terms of emissions reduction estimates and calculations, the Global 
changes being made or new policies being implemented. 
Warming Potentials (GWP) used to calculate the GHG inventory results 
•  Cross-sectoral coordination are not clear at present. This needs to be clearly reflected to improve 
transparency. For future reviews of the NDC, national communications and 
•  Funding directly to communities via education
the LT-LEDS, a clear statement on the methodology, values, formulas and 
•  Effective data collection and management any default values used will improve transparency, reporting and planning for 
emissions reductions.
•  Identifying policy gaps and duplications
There is a clear desire to work cross-sectorally to eliminate duplications, share 
data and resolve any policy overlaps. This includes identifying where policies 
Alamea Policy: strengthening existing 
can be formed cross-sectorally.
LT-LEDS stakeholders grouped these into five areas: policies
Priority should be given to identification of gaps in policy, duplication of 
New-Niu Winds of change: education  policy, lack of enforcement and the need to connect policies across sectors, 
where relevant. Current examples include duplication in urban planning 
and training processes, transport policy linked to energy policy (via the TERMPLUS) and 
the mainstreaming of policies into corporate, sector and annual plans. Low 
enforcement can be the result of limited human resources and equipment. In 
New interventions and actions should consider the education and training 
the development of the LT-LEDS it is important to avoid re-phrasing existing 
of people accordingly. For new policy standards and legislation, training and 
policies and all sector intervention actions will consider existing policies that 
consultation - which may include induction and orientation programs - should 
can be built on. 
be included to build public awareness. A common requirement is the need for 
new equipment, with standard operating procedures being used by subject 
matter experts who are available locally. Tonga aims to use local expertise 
and develop local protocols to support the implementation of intervention 
actions under all five sectors. 
Vehicles and Waste
Consideration should be given to the interconnectedness of vehicles, road 
maintenance and solid waste disposal. Challenges include coordination 
between ministries, lack of enforcement of regulations, limited access to data 
collection between line ministries and the lack of policies for vehicles and for 
waste disposal. The importation of vehicles into Tonga is already restricted 
to those manufactured from 2006 onwards, with vehicles older than this 
classified as waste in limited landfill sites. The focus is on the importance of 
road maintenance and waste segregation to support the implementation of 
transport and waste intervention actions.
Pa’anga (Mai Ange): securing financing
Finance and securing funding is an important requirement to fulfill nearly 
all intervention actions under each sector. Funding needs to be publicly 
increased and go straight to the community for education and awareness. In 
particular, there needs to be an increased focus on strengthening vulnerable 
populations, ensuring they are involved and consulted in the implementation 
of all sector intervention actions. 
Image: A boat during low tide, in the intertidal zone 
on the coast of Manuka, Tongatapu. Taken in 2021.
94 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 95
4 MAJOR FIRST STEPS 4 MAJOR FIRST STEPSCLIMATE 
5
5.1  National context: climate 
RESILIENCE  
change impacts in Tonga
& ADAPTATION
Tonga faces near and long term  Sea Level Rise
exposure to the negative impacts of 
With most settlements close to the 
climate change and natural disasters. 
coast, Tonga is particularly vulnerable 
Tonga was ranked the second 
to sea level rise. Satellite data 
highest disaster risk country globally, 
collected by Tonga’s Meteorological 
according to the World Risk Report 
Service and Pacific-Australia Climate 
in 2020 (Bündnis Entwicklung Hilft, 
Change Science and Adaptation 
2020). Tonga’s future climate will 
Planning Program, indicates that sea 
see annual mean temperatures and 
level has risen near Tonga by about 
extremely high daily temperatures 
6 mm per year since 1993. This is 
continue to rise; ocean acidification 
larger than the global average of 
is expected to continue and tropical 
2.8–3.6 mm per year. According to 
cyclones are projected to be less 
their very high emissions scenario, 
frequent but more intense. 
this rise in sea level is projected to 
Temperature and Rainfall be in the range of 7-17 cm annually, 
by 2030. However, research by ADB 
Annual and wet season mean 
projects that sea level will rise by 24 
and minimum temperatures have 
±5 cm by 2050 under the RCP8.5 
increased in Nuku’alofa since 1949 
scenario, and by 80±25 cm by 2100 
(Pacific-Australia Climate Change 
under the RCP8.5 scenario (ADB, 
Science and Adaptation Planning 
2019). The risk of inundation due to 
Program, 2013). Wet season 
sea level rise is projected to remain 
maximum temperatures have 
relatively low until 2050. According 
increased at a rate of 0.15°C per 
to the ADB, the Sopu wetlands will 
decade and dry season minimum 
continue to attenuate tidal heights 
temperatures have increased at a 
and reduce coastal inundation 
rate of 0.13°C per decade over the 
from extreme high tides. The Sopu 
same period. By 2030, under a very 
wetlands currently dampen the tidal 
high emissions scenario, this increase 
range to around 30 cm. This effect 
in temperature is projected to be in 
is projected to continue out to 2050, 
the range of 0.4–1.0°C. Further, the 
and high tides will probably be only 
1-in-20-year maximum temperature 
10 – 15 cm higher than present. As 
for Nuku’alofa will increase by 1.5°C 
sea levels rise, the dampening effect 
by 2050, though some climate 
of the Sopu wetland on the tides will 
models project an even greater rise 
diminish, and risks from inundation 
of over 2°C (ADB, 2019).
will eventually impact most of the 
Since the 1940s, there have not been  low lying areas of Nuku’alofa by 2090 
clear trends in wet season or annual  under the RCP8.5 scenario. By this 
rainfall in Tonga. However, projections  time, many houses will be completely 
suggest that extreme rainfall days  inundated at high tide, and low lying 
will occur more often and be more  areas may have to be abandoned. 
intense (Pacific-Australia Climate 
Change Science and Adaptation 
Planning Program, 2013). The 
same data shows that since the 
18th century, the level of ocean 
acidification has slowly increased in 
Tonga’s waters.
Image (opposite page): Seawall along the village of 
Manuka in the Eastern district, Tongatapu. Taken in 2021.
TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 97
5 CLIMATE RESILIENCE & ADAPTATION5.2 Existing policies  •  Target 3: Human Settlements pathways actions will support climate 
resilient homes, schools, and community halls, through actions such as 
frameworks and  ‘Improve the climate resilience of housing and buildings’ (Action 5). 
commitment to  
JNAP2: the LT-LEDS supports the overall objectives of JNAP2, in particular, 
Objective 4 on designing and implementing on-the-ground actions that 
climate adaptation
build a Resilient Tonga by 2035 at national, island and community levels, 
specifically against the following objectives:
•  Objective 2: As JNAP2 seeks to implement a coordinated approach to 
Despite these challenges Tonga has demonstrated 
research, monitoring and management of data and information, this 
commitment to achieving a resilient Tonga by 2035.  will be supported by the LT-LEDS under the AFOLU pathway in Action 
2 to improve coordination of public and private sectors to harmonise 
The Tongan Strategic Development Framework (see Section 1.3) states  existing data collection.
‘Tonga is our inheritance and our wealth in the form of our people, our 
•  Objective 4: The LT-LEDs has specific actions to support climate 
land, and our strong Christian and traditional values that underpin our 
resilient infrastructure under Energy pathways Action 2: Draft regulation 
culture. We have inherited this from our families. We must pass it on to our 
and policy paper for infrastructure developed using green infrastructure 
children in an improved condition.’ (TSDF II, page 17).’ This is supported by 
standards. 
the complementing policies of the Tonga Climate Change Policy (TCCP, 
2016) and JNAP2 (introduced in Section 1.3).   •  Objective 5: Seeks to secure and mobilise the required finances and 
resources to build a Resilient Tonga by 2035, which is supported under 
the Human Settlements pathway by Action 2: Develop a disaster risk 
financing strategy to manage funds during disaster response so that 
Tonga Strategic Development Framework 2015-2025: the LT-LEDS vision  communities can access climate resilient infrastructure, and Action 3: 
and ambition supports a TSDF II National Outcome for ‘A more inclusive,  Engage with donors and partners to source funds for infrastructure 
The LT-LEDS 
sustainable and effective land administration, environment management,  management and design, particularly on stormwater management and 
aligns with 
and resilience to climate and risk’. In particular, sector pathways for Energy,  road design’. The Energy pathway also supports this objective through 
Tonga’s key 
Transport and Human Settlements align with the following Organisational  Action 6: Increase access to finance for the private sector to fund 
policies in 
Outcomes: supply-side renewable energy, projects and green infrastructure.
regards to 
resilience and  •  Organisational Outcome 4.1: The LT-LEDS includes steps and actions 
adaptation in the  to progress towards more reliable, safe, affordable and widely available 
Tonga’s Second NDC: the LT-LEDS and the Second NDC are well aligned 
following ways: energy services with the aim to increase use of renewable energy.
in terms of mitigation and adaptation, specifically the Second NDC’s three 
•  Organisational Outcome 4.2: Actions under the Transport pathways  adaptation targets have been integrated into the LT-LEDS in the following 
support more reliable, safe and affordable transport services that are  ways:
energy and environmentally efficient.
•  30 percent of land in Tonga utilised for agroforestry or forestry by 2025: 
•  Organisational Outcome 4.4: The Human Settlements pathways  integrated into the AFOLU pathway under Action 1 to strengthen Public 
contains actions and measures to support more reliable, safe and  Private Partnerships to drive requirements of organisations with the aim 
affordable buildings and other structures, that consider disaster  of sharing responsibility to promote best practices in agriculture and 
resilience and energy efficiency.  forestry.
•  Organisational Outcome 4.5: The process of developing the LT-LEDs  •  Prevent any permanent loss of land to rising sea levels on Tonga’s four 
enabled stakeholders to practice ‘improved foresight’ by employing  main islands (Tongatapu, Ha’apai, Vava’u, and ‘Eua): This is supported 
futures thinking principles to consider Tonga’s low emissions futures  by Action 9 under the AFOLU pathway to ‘Strengthen and refine 
(See Chapter 2).  current policy on coastal protection’. This action will leverage traditional 
knowledge in plant selection for restoration of mangroves and 
replanting of foreshores. 
Tonga Climate Change Policy: the LT-LEDS contains actions that will support 
•  Maintenance of existing stocks of fish and other marine species through 
the delivery of targets under the TCCP, specifically its adaptation targets:
a commitment to expand the area covered by Marine Protected Areas 
•  Target 1: The AFOLU pathways inclusion of MPAS and SMAs supports  (MPAs) and Special Management Areas (SMAs) to 30 percent of 
the TCCP target that every coastal community has a special  Tonga’s Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ): This will be supported through 
management area and protected coastal environment as a means to  the establishment of an SMA association and ensure its maintenance 
protect against sea level rise and storm surges. through financial support and capacity (Action 5) with the purpose of 
expanding the number of MPAs and SMAs.
•  Target 2: The redesign of roads, buildings and other infrastructure so 
they are resilient to disasters is integrated into Transport and Human  The TSDF II, TCCP and JNAP2 form a whole-of-Tonga approach to building 
Settlement pathways through actions such as ‘Human Settlements  resilience over the next decade. This approach aligns with international 
Action 2: Develop a disaster risk financing strategy to manage funds  agreements, including the Paris Agreement under the UNFCCC, the Sendai 
during disaster response’ and ‘Transport Action 3: Strengthening Road  Framework, the Montreal Protocol, the UN Sustainable Development Goals, 
maintenance - Tanu Hala’.   the Small Island Developing States Accelerated Modalities of Action Pathway 
and the Framework for Resilient Development in the Pacific.
98 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 99
5 CLIMATE RESILIENCE & ADAPTATION 5 CLIMATE RESILIENCE & ADAPTATIONExpansion of Marine Protected Areas 
5.3 Synergies between 
and Special Management Areas
mitigation and adaptation 
identified throughout the  The LT-LEDS supports Tonga’s Second NDC with maintenance of existing 
stocks of fish and other marine species through a commitment to expand the 
stakeholders consultation  area covered by MPAs and SMAs. SMAs will help prevent any permanent loss 
of land to rising sea levels on Tonga’s four main islands, while MPAs will support 
process   the maintenance of the existing stocks of fish and other marine species. 
This combination of measures will improve overall resilience by improving 
fisheries productivity and management, thereby boosting livelihood 
The Government of Tonga has implemented a variety of adaptation measures  opportunities and incomes for local fishing communities and reducing 
to enhance climate resilience and to minimise the adverse impacts of climate  vulnerability to food shortages. It is expected that they will also attract 
change on the community, economy and our everyday lives.  greater numbers of international tourists, with associated benefits for 
employment and economic growth. Stakeholders acknowledge that a 
The LT-LEDS is no different, with multiple co-benefits for adaptation and 
common definition is required regarding what is included in MPAs and SMAs, 
resilience identified in the process of developing sectoral pathways. 
along with support to communities and enforcement of permissible uses 
within the areas.
Improve productivity and diversity of 
Reforestation as part of promoting 
The following 
agroforestry
measures  best practices in agroforestry  
captures these 
synergies and  The diversity of species within the agroforestry and woodlands-dominated  Tonga has made strong commitments to reforestation, including planting 
cut across  landscape of Tonga is credited with helping to maintain the general health  one million trees under its Second NDC. These additional trees will increase 
the sectoral  of plants and ecosystems (GOT, 2010b). Improving agroforestry and  Tonga’s mitigation potential. They will also deliver adaptation and resilience 
pathways: subsequent mixed production can also bring greater resilience, by increasing  benefits by improving the health and biodiversity of Tonga’s ecosystems, 
land productivity and efficiency in the use of water and other resources 
reducing exposure to extreme weather events, protecting waterways, 
and protecting against soil erosion, as well as serving carbon sequestration 
improving soil structure, avoiding erosion and protecting against flooding. If 
objectives (IPCC 2014). However, stakeholders acknowledge efforts will need 
reforestation is implemented with mixed production systems, this will increase 
to be made to overcome dependency on imported foods and limited space 
land productivity and efficiency in the use of water and other resources. 
in urban areas, and to assess the net effect on agricultural crops grown under 
Stakeholders noted that forestry officers need to better quantify the costs 
agroforestry regimes. 
and benefits of trees, including assessing the benefits of mixed production. 
Improving the productivity and diversity of agroforestry for food, fiber, and 
In addition there is a need to utilise local experts within MAFF and other 
timber and increasing the standing stock (biomass) of trees in agroforestry 
partners to carry out this field research and determine potential tree species, 
systems will bring mitigation benefits by increasing the carbon stock of 
tree-crop associations, tree/crop-soil categorisation, species selection, soil 
Tonga’s soil and woody biomass. This action will also provide significant 
preparation techniques and management techniques. Landowners should be 
adaptation co-benefits for climate change adaptation and resilience. 
engaged in a participatory manner in order to generate ownership of these 
These include income generation and subsistence from productive species 
approaches and technologies from the outset. The proposed community 
and commodities; maintenance of tree cover to protect and regenerate 
nurseries will allow communities to actively take part in the national 
soil fertility and sources of freshwater; and revitalisation of well-adapted 
reforestation efforts.
customary practices and associated traditional knowledge. 
Active agroforestry systems also help minimise land tillage (especially repeated  Enhance home gardening
ploughing); restricts the slashing and burning of weeds; increases the use of 
mulching and composting materials; and minimises incidences of pest and  Tonga seeks to expand production and improve the productivity of home 
disease infestation. A climate-smart approach to sustainable agroforestry  gardens, including household agroforestry, with particular attention to home 
will draw on local expertise and the experience of Tongan landholders in the  gardens managed by women, to produce multiple vegetable crops for 
growing and use of trees as part of their traditional agroforestry regimes.  household consumption. The intended result is increased productivity and 
This will be enriched by the appropriate introduction of climate resilient crop  local income, increased food production at the household level and increased 
varieties and practices based on best available scientific knowledge.  land productivity and efficiency in the use of water and other resources, to 
protect against soil erosion as well as serve carbon sequestration objectives. 
Unnecessary burning of organic wastes will be prevented through the use of 
mulching and composting techniques, where locally-made organic fertilizer 
will be available at home. In addition, home gardens help women plant trees 
of social, cultural and economic value, such as the paper mulberry for feta’aki 
(tapa cloth) making. All these outcomes will represent co-benefits from the 
perspective of climate change adaptation and resilience, in addition to the 
mitigation effects of protection of soil organic matter and increased plant 
biomass in home gardens.  
100 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 101
5 CLIMATE RESILIENCE & ADAPTATION 5 CLIMATE RESILIENCE & ADAPTATIONCo-benefits of energy interventions Reduced waste production and 
A number of energy interventions in Tonga’s sectoral pathways will bring   sustainable waste disposal
adaptation and mitigation benefits. For example, demand response systems 
can help keep a power grid stable by balancing electricity supply and  The way in which Waste integrates with other sectors, as well as adaptation 
demand. This stability will mean resilience and reliability during natural  and resilience was given much consideration through the LT-LEDS 
disasters and other disruptions. Likewise, the introduction of battery storage  development. Interactions include liquid waste, solid waste and the disposal 
will bring grid stability, though stakeholders noted the need for proper  of battery storage and EV batteries. 
disposal of batteries lest they cause negative environmental impacts. Further, 
Proper collection of liquid waste (such as wastewater and fecal sludge) 
fulfilling new and existing renewable energy targets will bring more energy 
prevents runoff and water and soil contamination. This would result in 
to the grid and reduce Tonga’s reliance on imported fuels. However, not all 
adaptation and health co-benefits, particularly during storms and cyclones 
renewable energy is cyclone proof, so stakeholders suggest consideration 
(when waste infrastructure can be damaged and septic tanks/pit latrines can 
should be given to a mix of renewable options, alongside careful placement.  
overflow). Further, ad hoc solid waste can turn into debris during tropical 
Other energy conservation measures should bring adaptation and resilience  storms and cyclones. Thus, the proper collection and sorting of solid waste can 
co-benefits. For example, in order to implement building standards for  reduce the risk of marine, coastal and ecosystem pollution, thus serving as a 
energy efficiency, a review of the building code will be required. This  co-benefit towards adaptation. In particular, Tonga’s efforts to reduce single-
will provide an opportunity to ensure that new constructions are well- use plastic and increase the use of local materials could lead to green job 
engineered to withstand the worsening effects of tropical cyclones. Tonga  creation through traditional materials markets, the introduction of an alternative 
also seeks to improve street lighting through LED lamps, which will reduce  materials economy in Tonga and reduced dependence on imported goods.
energy consumption and increase safety and pedestrian access. However, 
Tonga’s action on composting and returning organics to the land will also 
stakeholders noted that consideration needs to be given to the correct light-
bring climate resilience and adaptation benefits. These include using compost 
spectrum to ensure new LED lighting does not bring negative impacts to 
as soil amendment to return valuable nutrients and carbon to land, while 
wildlife, such as the risk of nesting turtles being attracted to bright lights. 
decreasing reliance on synthetic fertilisers; these are polluting to manufacture, 
import and use (including through the release of nitrous oxide), unhealthy 
Impacts of EV uptake on transport 
and extremely expensive. Further, it can reduce soil erosion events that are 
higher during periods of intense rain; these will become more common due to 
and waste
climate change. It will also improve crop yields through the use of compost and 
improving moisture retention of soil (resulting in lower irrigation requirements). 
Tonga is keen to encourage the uptake of electric vehicles, with Transport 
Finally, composting leads to improved soil conditions in areas degraded by 
stakeholders suggesting the adoption of EVs for the government fleet. 
climate change or industrial activities (e.g. mines, quarries and old landfill). 
This will bring resilience during disasters as batteries enable Tongans to 
be better prepared and less reliant on imported fuels (the supply of which 
Resilient community infrastructure in 
is often disrupted during tropical storms and cyclones), as well as saving 
money on imported fuel costs. However, the batteries needed for EVs may 
human settlements across Tonga
bring negative environmental impacts through leaching and contamination 
into soil and water. Stakeholders therefore stressed the need for due 
With most Tongans living in an urban environment, human settlement 
consideration to be given to safe and clean waste disposal.
interventions primarily aim to address climate adaptation and resilience 
objectives.  For example, the introduction of Disaster Risk Reduction (DDR) 
remote sensing capabilities, specifically GIS and satellite imaging to create 
and map resilient community infrastructures by digitisation,  will create 
access to resilient community infrastructure such as schools, churches and 
community halls. These facilities provide a dual purpose of social convening 
and as assembly areas during emergencies. Further, DRR remote sensing 
capabilities and enhancing information sharing with regional monitoring 
facilities will improve access to timely information for emergency evacuations, 
to the whole of Tonga’s populations. Investing resources to regularly upgrade 
and maintain community infrastructure will ensure that climate resilient 
assembly facilities can keep communities safe during emergencies.
Upgrading roads to integrate stormwater drainage and improve road design 
will reduce flood risk in Tonga’s urban areas and increase road resilience to 
flood damage. As rainfall becomes increasingly unpredictable, a number of 
measures could improve Tonga’s water supply. These include revising the 
Resource and Supply Master Plan, centralising water supply systems (such as in 
villages), and amending legislation and policy. This will have a positive impact 
on Tonga’s ability to adapt to water shortages resulting from climate change. 
Finally the retrofitting of houses and other buildings that may be done for 
the purpose of energy efficiency should also be combined with disaster 
retrofitting. This would mean houses and buildings can withstand damaging 
winds and tropical cyclones and will improve Tonga’s ability to prepare and 
Image: Mangroves at the Fanga’uta Lagoon along  manage disasters as they occur. 
Havelu, Tongatapu.Taken in 2021.
102 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 103
5 CLIMATE RESILIENCE & ADAPTATION 5 CLIMATE RESILIENCE & ADAPTATIONTonga is committed to co-ordinating processes for it’s LT-LEDS 
and future NDCs, with the aim to bring alignment between long 
and short term actions, thereby avoiding duplication of efforts 
and allowing for regular exchange of information between the 
GOVERNANCE, 
6
two documents. This alignment will occur under institutional 
arrangements, systems for monitoring and assessing progress, 
MONITORING  
and revisions or review cycles. 
& REVIEW
Institutional
Tonga already has a preexisting institutional arrangement as a precondition 
for effective LT-LEDS and NDC alignment. The JNAP management structure 
will continue to oversee the implementation of the LT-LEDS and subsequent 
revisions of NDCs (see more on this cycle below). It is intended that the 
Mitigation Division will facilitate communication and exchange of critical 
information (e.g. data, projections, policy priorities) across teams and working 
groups, promoting the development of coherent and aligned policies and 
priorities for both the LT-LEDS and the NDCs. (See Annex B for governance 
arrangements).
The JNAP Secretariat has clear roles and responsibilities (see JNAP2 for 
full details), leading coordination and linkages between Parliament and 
Cabinet, the National Climate Change Coordination Committee, the National 
Emergency Committee, and the JNAP Technical Team. The Secretariat will 
advise the GOT on appropriate and effective policy responses on climate 
change issues, coordinate all climate change related activities and liaise with 
all ministries to ensure the implementation of mainstreaming into government 
plans, data and information management, capacity building and resilience 
building actions. 
Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) & Monitoring and 
Evaluation (M&E) systems
Tonga will use existing MRV and M&E systems in the context of review and 
revision cycles of both LT-LEDS and NDCs. Monitoring, measuring and 
evaluating progress of short-term action and NDC implementation can be 
useful to inform and readjust longer term strategies. Tonga will continue with 
MRV and M&E arrangements that are common to both the NDC and the 
LT-LEDS, through the NDC M&E Framework and JNAP2’s Monitoring and 
Evaluation System Guide.1 
The JNAP2 M&E system is designed to support and contribute to reporting 
towards the TSDF and NDCs. It is operationalised by the JNAP Secretariat 
and National Planning Division. The GOT remains committed to indigenous 
notions of data gathering, synthesis and learning, exemplified in the Kakala 
Learning Framework2 which is at the heart of this M&E system.
Image (opposite page): Seedlings at the Forestry 
Division’s (MAFF) nursery at Tokomololo, Tongatapu. 
Taken in 2020.
1  This document acknowledges that at the time of publication Tonga’s Second NDC’s Monitoring and 
Evaluation Framework 2021 was still being finalised. The Government of Tonga will seek to align the LT-
LEDS M&E with that of the Second NDC.
2  Thaman, K. H. (2009). Towards cultural democracy in teaching and learning with specific references to 
Pacific Island Nations (PINs). International Journal for the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning, 3(2), 6
TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 105
6 GOVERNANCE, MONITORING & REVIEWReview and revision cycles 
Tonga plans to undertake regular review and revision of its LT-LEDS 
to ensure it remains strategic and relevant, and reflective of changing 
national circumstances. Changes in national, regional and global context 
and macroeconomic trends e.g. rapid cost declines in certain mitigation 
technologies, may require LT-LEDS assumptions and decisions to be 
reconsidered. Information from the MRV and M&E systems may also prompt 
Tonga to reconsider or adjust the LT-LEDS and its sector pathways if they are 
not achieving the desired outcomes. 
Tonga will update its LT-LEDS in line with the five-year cycle of review under 
the provisions of the Paris Agreement. Thus subsequent NDCs and LT-LEDS 
will be updated in a single coordinated manner, encouraging alignment of 
near-term policy, planning and targets with long-term sectoral pathways. 
Participatory engagement on NDC enhancement and LT-LEDS will be held 
jointly with stakeholders, and the associated resources required will be 
streamlined. This coordinated review and revision will occur under the same 
government entity, Department of Climate Change, further maximising 
synergies between NDCs and LT-LEDS. 
Figure 2. Proposal for harmonised revision cycles of Tonga’s NDCs and LT-LEDS  
2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
TONGA STRATEGIC DEVELOPMENT FRAMEWORK
JNAP2
SECOND NDC
 SUBMISSION 
BY COP26
LT-LEDS
THIRD NDC
 SUBMISSION 
BY 2025 CO-ORDINATED NDC & 
LT-LEDS REVISION
LT-LEDS
FOURTH NDC
 SUBMISSION 
BY 2030 CO-ORDINATED NDC & 
LT-LEDS REVISION
LT-LEDS
Image (opposite page): Aerial view of the city of 
Nuku’alofa, Tongatapu at dawn. Taken in 2021.
106 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050
6 GOVERNANCE, MONITORING & REVIEWReference list
Government 
policies, 
Asian Development Bank. (2014). Solid Waste Management in the Pacific  legislations and  Ministry of Agriculture, Food, Forests and Fisheries. (2015b). Tonga 
Tonga Country Snapshot. Retrieved from https://www.adb.org/sites/default/ decrees can be  Framework for Action on Food Security 2015-2020: draft for follow up 
files/publication/42660/solid-waste-management-tonga.pdf  found in Annex C consultation. Retrieved from http://pafpnet.spc.int/attachments/article/636/
Tonga%20Framework%20for%20Action%20on%20Food%20Security_
Asian Development Bank. (2019). Climate Change Assessment for Integrated 
DRAFT_For%20Consultation.pdf
Urban Resilience Sector Project. Retrieved from https://www.adb.org/sites/
default/files/linked-documents/49455-002-cca.pdf  Pacific-Australia Climate Change Science and Adaptation Planning Program. 
(2013). Current and future climate of Tonga. Australian Government. 
Asian Development Bank. (2020). Tonga: Nuku’alofa Port Upgrade Project, 
Retrieved from https://www.pacificclimatechangescience.org/wp-content/
Sector Assessment (Summary): Transport. Retrieved from https://www.adb.
uploads/2013/06/10_PACCSAP-Tonga-11pp_WEB.pdf 
org/sites/default/files/linked-documents/53045-003-ssa.pdf  
Tonga Power Limited. (2021). Tonga Power Limited Presentation at 
Asian Development Bank. (2021). Tonga: Fanga’uta Lagoon Crossing Project. 
TERMPLUS Workshop 24-25 August 2021, Nuku’alofa, Tonga.
Retrieved from https://www.adb.org/projects/53045-002/main 
Tonga Statistics Department. (2016). Tonga 2016 Census of Population and 
Bündnis Entwicklung Hilft. (2020). World Risk Report. Retrieved from https://
Housing. Vol.1. Retrieved from http://www.ilo.org/ilostat/ 
reliefweb.int/sites/reliefweb.int/files/resources/WorldRiskReport-2020.pdf 
Tonga Statistics Department. (2019). Social Statistics, Facts and Figures 
Department of Energy. (2020). Tonga Energy Balance. Internal Document.
2018-2019. Retrieved from https://tongastats.gov.to/statistical-fact-sheet-and-
FAO. n.d. Country Reports: The State of Tonga’s Biodiversity for Food and  bulletin-available/ 
Agriculture. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/3/CA3503EN/ca3503en.pdf
United Nations Climate Technology Centre and Network. (2018). Government 
FAO. (2010). National Fishery Sector Overview Tonga. Retrieved from http:// of Tonga: Baseline and Benchmarking Study. National Renewable Energy 
www.fao.org/fishery/docs/DOCUMENT/fcp/en/FI_CP_TO.pdf  Laboratory, March 2018. Retrieved from https://www.ctc-n.org/system/files/
dossier/3b/deliverable_1.2_baseline_and_benchmarking_study.pdf 
Green Climate Fund. (2018). Tonga Country Programme. Retrieved from 
https://www.greenclimate.fund/document/tonga-country-programme  World Bank. (2015). Report No: ACS13817 Pacific Islands Supporting Safe, 
Efficient and Sustainable Maritime Transport Systems Improving Ports and 
IRENA. (2013). Pacific Lighthouses. Renewable energy opportunities and 
Maritime Shipping 
challenges in the Pacific Islands region. Tonga. The International Renewable 
Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi. Retrieved from http://www.sustainablesids.org/ World Bank. (2020). Population data. Retrieved form https://data.worldbank.
wp-content/uploads/2016/11/IRENA2015Pacific-Lighthouse_Tonga.pdf org/country/tonga 
IFAD. (2017). Kingdom of Tonga: Country Strategy Note. Retrieved from  World Bank. (2021). Economic Data. Retrieved from https://data.worldbank.
https://www.ifad.org/documents/38711624/40077965/Tonga%20Country%20 org/country/tonga 
Strategy%20Note_approved_0010-70-242_8412.pdf/cf2ef620-6d2e-4e41-
World Food Programme. (Undated). 2.4 Tonga Waterways 
b926-73a22fabff3e?1517984189473 
Assessment. Retrieved from https://dlca.logcluster.org/display/public/
Kronen, M. (2004a). Alu toutai-Na laki qoli-Fun or duty: school children’s  DLCA/2.4+Tonga+Waterways+Assessment 
involvement in subsistence fisheries in Tonga and Fiji. SPC Women in Fisheries 
Information Bulletin, 14, pp.9-17.
Kronen, M. (2004b). Fishing for fortunes? A socio-economic 
assessment of Tonga’s artisanal fisheries. Fisheries Research 
70 (2004) 121–134. Elsever (2004). Retrieved from https://
spccfpstore1.blob.core.windows.net/digitallibrary-docs/files/fc/
fc6449c445c2d035918b1aeb64bf81a5.pdf?sv=2015-12-11&sr=b&sig=UJrDh
%2BUacEeceS2hBTDlUX3E%2Fa%2FZCdPvLb7E43uYz2E%3D&se=2022-
04-04T17%3A29%3A00Z&sp=r&rscc=public%2C%20max-age%3D86400-
0%2C%20max-stale%3D86400&rsct=application%2Fpdf&rscd=inline%3B%20
filename%3D%22Kronen_04_Fortunes.pdf%22 
Kronen,M. & Bender,A. (2007). Assessing Marine Resource Exploitation in 
Lofanga, Tonga: One Case Study—Two Approaches. Retrieved from https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/225478354_Assessing_Marine_Resource_
Exploitation_in_Lofanga_Tonga_One_Case_Study-Two_Approaches 
Ministry of Agriculture, Food, Forests and Fisheries. (2015a). Tonga National 
Agricultural Census. Retrieved from http://www.fao.org/fileadmin/templates/
ess/ess_test_folder/World_Census_Agriculture/Country_info_2010/Reports/
Reports_5/TON_ENG_REP_2015.pdf 
108 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 109Annex A. Consultation List
Seti Chen Tonga Power Limited SOE
Talo Fonua Tonga Power Limited SOE
The following participants participated in Tonga’s long-term low emission 
Vahid Fifita Tonga Power Limited SOE
development strategy process by attending one of the 3 workshops (October 
2020, February 2021 and July 2021) or contributing to virtual stakeholder  Andrew Kautoke Tonga Power Limited SOE
consultations (April - May 2020) and the validation workshop (October 2021). 
We thank them for their invaluable participation and feedback.  Quddus Fielea Tonga Water Board SOE
Evaleti Fuapau Tonga Water Board SOE
ORGANISATION 
FIRST NAME LAST NAME ORGANISATION Norma Lavemai Tonga Airports Limited SOE
TYPE
Andrew Niukapu Ports Authority Tonga SOE
Cardinal Mafi Roman Catholic Church in Tonga FBO
Mefilina  Tohi National Reserve Bank of Tonga SOE
‘Inoke Kupu Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints FBO
Seneti Lasike National Reserve Bank of Tonga SOE
Mele Moimoi Tonga National Council of Churches (IDRIT Project) FBO
Siosiua Talanoa Friendly Islands Shipping Agency SOE
Salote Sakalia Caritas Tonga FBO
Ifalemi Ma'u Pacific Energy Private
Malialosa Tapueluelu Caritas Tonga FBO
Jesse Tikomailepanoni TOTAL Limited Private
Keasi Pongi Civil Society Forum of Tonga CSO
Dean Corpuz TOTAL Limited Private
Emele Latu Civil Society Forum of Tonga CSO
Lopeti Palu Raeworx Limited Private
Timote  Lomu Civil Society Forum of Tonga CSO
Akesa Ahokava Raeworx Limited Private
Olive Mafi Tonga Youth Employment & Entrepreneurship (TYEE) CSO
Tatafu Moeaki ADB Donor
Vesta Guttenbeil Tonga Youth Employment & Entrepreneurship (TYEE) CSO
Ana Tukia Land Transport Division, Ministry of Infrastructure (MOI) Government
Lucy Latu-Jones Tonga Youth Employment & Entrepreneurship (TYEE) CSO
Hemaloto Tupou Marine Ports Division, MOI Government
Papiloa Foliaki Tonga Community Development Trust CSO
Tevita Lavemai Land Transport Division, MOI Government
Kalolaine Kavaefiafi Tonga Community Development Trust CSO
Peni Fa'aui Buildings Division, MOI Government
Sione Taumoefolau Tonga Red Cross Society CSO
Roki Fatiaki Buildings Division, MOI Government
Marika Moala Tonga Red Cross Society CSO
Hepi Oko Land Transport Division, MOI Government
Vanessa Lolohea Tonga National Youth Congress CSO
Ane Tauki’uvea Ministry of Infrastructure Government
Samiuela Halahala Tonga National Youth Congress CSO
‘Atelaite Palu Ministry of Infrastructure Government
Siosiua Veikune Pacific Island Students Fighting Climate Change CSO
‘Otile Talanoa Ministry of Infrastructure Government
Kilisitina Moala Take the Lead | Taki Mu’a CSO
Filisi Tonga Ministry of Health Government
Elizabeth V Kite Take the Lead | Taki Mu’a CSO
Viliami Tongamana Ministry of Health Government
Maile Fotu Take the Lead | Taki Mu’a CSO
Tevita Faka’iloatonga Ministry of Health Government
Lakai  Fonua Tonga Chamber of Commerce & Industries CSO
Heimuli Likiafu Ministry of Agriculture, Food & Forests (MAFF) Government
Paula Taumoepeau Tonga Chamber of Commerce & Industries CSO
Mana'ia Halafihi Ministry of Agriculture, Food & Forests (MAFF) Government
Sam Vea Tonga Chamber of Commerce & Industries CSO
Charles  Kato Ministry of Agriculture, Food & Forests (MAFF) Government
Carrie Vaea Tonga Chamber of Commerce & Industries CSO
Elisaia Ika Ministry of Agriculture, Food & Forests (MAFF) Government
Crystal Ake Mordi Tonga Trust CSO
Women Affairs and Gender Equality Division, MIA 
Timote Laume Live & Learn Tonga CSO ‘Eleni Tu'i Latu’ila (Ministry of Internal Affairs) Government
Lola Tonga Waste Authority Limited SOE Women Affairs and Gender Equality Division, MIA 
Ane Tovi Government
(Ministry of Internal Affairs)
Nikolasi Fonua Tonga Power Limited SOE
Latu Palu Ministry of Trade and Economic Development Government
Pesa Tohi Tonga Power Limited SOE
110 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 111Sione Faleafa Ministry of Trade and Economic Development Government ‘Ofa Sefana Department of Energy, MEIDECC Government
Sandra Fifita Ministry of Trade and Economic Development Government Lupe Matoto Department of Environment, MEIDECC Government
Mele Fonua Ministry of Trade and Economic Development Government Mafile'o Masi Department of Environment, MEIDECC Government
Climate Change, Disaster Risk Financing and Resilient  Dorothy Foliaki Department of Environment, MEIDECC Government
Saane Lolo Government
Development Unit, Ministry of Finance
Sulieti Hufanga Department of Environment, MEIDECC Government
Linda Fa'u Ministry of Finance Government
Sisilia Ulakai Department of Environment, MEIDECC Government
Lupe Fe'iloaki National Planning Division, Prime Minister's Office Government
Mele Tovi Department of Environment, MEIDECC Government
Ma’ata Mafi National Planning Division, Prime Minister's Office Government
Loisi  Tongia Department of Environment, MEIDECC Government
Silia Taulava National Planning Division, Prime Minister's Office Government
Fe'ofa'aki Latu Information Department, MEIDECC Government
Fono Hola National Planning Division, Prime Minister’s Office Government
Lu’isa Taunga National Emergency Management Office, MEIDECC Government
Kiu Tatafu National Planning Division, Prime Minister’s Office Government
‘Ofa Sefana GHG Inventory Team, MEIDECC Government
Lusia  Kaitapu Tonga Statistics Department Government
Lopeti Tufui Department of Climate Change Government
Samisoni Fotu Tonga Statistics Department Government
Elizabeth Akauola Department of Climate Change Government
Telekaki Latavao Tonga Statistics Department Government
Frances Satini Department of Climate Change Government
Masiva'ilo Masila Tonga Statistics Department Government
Anau Mataele Department of Climate Change Government
Ofeina He Tonga Statistics Department Government
Viliami Takau Department of Climate Change Government
Vaimoana Soakimi Tonga Statistics Department Government
Siutaisa Fakahua Department of Climate Change Government
Mele Taumoepeau Tonga Statistics Department Government
A Seini Tolu Department of Climate Change Government
Siola'a Malimali Ministry of Fisheries Government
Norma Taukapo Department of Climate Change Government
Manatu Samate Maile Ministry of Fisheries Government
Tonga Fuapau Department of Climate Change Government
Mele Fa’anunu Ministry of Fisheries Government
Susana Liava’a Department of Climate Change Government
Angelic Pale Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources (MLNR) Government
Estimoor Kaufusi Department of Climate Change Government
Susitina Ta'ai National Spatial Planning Authority Office, MLNR Government
Ma’ata Foliaki Department of Climate Change Government
Maka Matekitonga National Spatial Planning Authority Office, MLNR Government
Alilia Fine Facilitator Government
Rennie Vaiomounga Natural Resource Division, MLNR Government
Samisoni Tupou Facilitator Government
Lolo Tukuafu Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources Government
Posevima Havea Department of Climate Change Government
Kolomanu Fakatoulelei Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources Government
Akesiu Fifita Department of Climate Change Government
Taaniela Kula Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources Government
Loiloi Latu Facilitator Government
Halalilika ‘Etika Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources Government
Lilu Moala Department of Climate Change Government
Folauhola Latu’ila Ministry of Lands and Natural Resources Government
Elenoa Maile Department of Climate Change Government
‘Anaseini Manuopangai Ministry of Tourism Government
Mary Tuila Department of Climate Change Government
‘Atelaite Moa Ministry of Tourism Government
Star Pau'u Facilitator Other
Michael Cokanasiga Ministry of Revenue & Customs Government
Inoke Taufa Facilitator Other
Viliami Folaumahina Ministry of Revenue & Customs Government
Taniela Hoponoa Technical Expert Other
Siaosi Faka’osi Ministry of Internal Affairs Government
Richard Kautoke Technical Expert Other
Tevita Tukunga Department of Energy, MEIDECC Government
Polikalepo Kefu Facilitator Other
Eliate Laulaupea'alu Department of Energy, MEIDECC Government
Katrina Ma'u Fatiaki Facilitator Other
Samiuela Matakaiongo Department of Energy, MEIDECC Government
112 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 113Annex B. Process Governance Annex C. Relevant Legislation  
and Policy
The LT-LEDS was developed by a project team made up of key officials from Tonga’s 
Department of Climate Change from MEIDECC and staff from ClimateWorks Australia, 
GGGI and Relative Creative:  National 
•  The Department of Climate Change’s Mitigation Division at MEIDECC was  •  Tonga Strategic Development Framework (TSDF II, 2015-2025)
responsible for overall coordination, arranging and conducting all meetings and  •  Tonga Climate Change Policy (TCCP, 2016) 
workshops with stakeholders including government and civil society (see Annex 
•  Joint National Action Plan 2 Climate Change and Disaster Risk Management,  
A for full list of consulted stakeholders), reviewing and revising workshop reports, 
2018 -2028  (JNAP2)
providing guidance to international team on cultural concepts, protocols and 
•  Tonga’s Second Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC, 2020)
sensitivities, providing illustrations and core concept for document design, final 
reviewing of the overall document, as well as consultations with development  •  Third National Communication (TNC, 2019) 
partners. •  National Women’s Empowerment and Gender Equality Tonga Policy and Strategic 
Plan of Action 2019-2025 
•  ClimateWorks Australia had primary responsibility for overall project 
management, ensuring the team understands work assigned and timelines, and  Energy
managing grants and contracts.
•  Renewable Energy Act (2008)
•  GGGI was responsible for technical pathways analysis and advice on strategies  •  Electricity Act (2007)
and policy. 
•  Petroleum Act (1959)
•  Relative Creative led on the design of the workshops, support for facilitators and  •  Tonga Energy Road Map 2010-2020 (TERM)
professional visual communication design of product outputs. 
•   TERM-PLUS Framework
Governance and project oversight was provided by the existing JNAP Technical Team,  •  Tonga Energy Efficiency Master Plan (TEEMP)
a group of high-level Tongan officials with the mandate to provide high level guidance 
Transport
to the JNAP Secretariat, advise the National Climate Change Coordination Committee 
(NCCCC) on technical matters relating to JNAP2 and liaise with all Ministries.  •  Tonga National Infrastructure Investment Plan (NIIP II) 2013 -2023
The Project Team prepared the LT-LEDS draft for approval by the Tongan government.  AFOLU
The JNAP Technical Team and Technical Working Groups reviewed, validated and finally 
•  Tonga Agriculture Sector Plan (TASF) 2016-2020
endorsed the document. After approval and recommendation from the Director of 
•  Tonga Forestry Act 2016
Department of Climate Change, the CEO of MEIDECC and the Minister of MEIDECC, the 
LT-LEDS was submitted to Cabinet for approval in November, 2021. The Government of  •  Tonga National Forest Policy (TNFP) 2009
Tonga submitted its LT-LEDS to the UNFCCC in November, 2021.  •  Code of Practice for Sustainable Management of Forests 2010 
•  Tonga Fisheries Sector Plan 2016-2024
•  Management Plan for the Forests and Tree Resources of Tonga 2017
•  Agricultural Commodities Export Act 2002 
•  Animal Disease Act 1979
Figure 3. Institutional Arrangements for LT-LEDS Development
•  Birds and Fish Preservation Act 1915
•  Copra Act 1926
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC)
•  Food Act 2014
•  Markets Act 1976
Parliament Cabinet •  Noxious Weeds Act 1917
Standing Committee   Climate Change   •  Pesticides Act 2002
on Climate Change Cabinet Committee
•  Plant Quarantine Act 1982
•  Pounds and Animals Act 1918
MEIDECC
•  Rhinoceros Beetle Act 1912
Department of Climate Change | Mitigation Division
Waste
•  Waste Management Act (2005)
JNAP Technical Team   International   •  Environmental Management Act (2010)
Donors &   & NGO Forum Consultant Team National Climate Change 
Development Partners Mitigation & Adaptation   (ClimateWork Australia, FFFI,  Coordination Committee •  Environment Management (Litter and Waste Control) Regulations (2016)
Working Group Relative Creative)
Human Settlements
•  Tonga National Infrastructure Investment Plan 2020-2030 (NIIP 3)
Other Ministries  Faith-based  Local 
Private sector CSOs & NGOs
and agencies organisations communities
114 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 TONGA LOW EMISSION DEVELOPMENT STRATEGY 2021-2050 115Department of Climate Change 
Ministry of Meteorology, Energy, Information, 
Disaster Management, Environment, Climate 
Change and Communications (MEIDECC)
Level 3, O.G Sanft Building 
Taufa'ahau Road, Nuku'alofa, Tonga 
Tel +676 20 100 
www.climatechange.gov.to