Net Zero 
Strategy: Build 
 
Back Greener
October 2021Net Zero 
Strategy: Build 
Back Greener
Presented to Parliament pursuant to Section 14  
of the Climate Change Act 2008© Crown copyright 2021
This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where 
otherwise stated. To view this licence,  
visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3.
Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission 
from the copyright holders concerned.
This publication is available at www.gov.uk/official-documents.
Any enquiries regarding this publication should be sent to us at: enquiries@beis.gov.uk
ISBN 978-1-5286-2938-6
E02678428  10/21
Printed on paper containing 75% recycled fibre content minimum
Printed in the UK by HH Associates Ltd. on behalf of the Controller of  
Her Majesty’s Stationery OfficeContents
Contents
Forewords  6
Foreword from the Prime Minister  8
Foreword from the Secretary of State for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy  10
Executive Summary  12
What is net zero and why do we need to act?   14
Why should the UK act first?  15
Endnotes  34
Chapter 1  Why Net Zero
Levelling up the country, ending our domestic contribution to climate change, and 
leading the world to a greener, more sustainable future  38
Endnotes  56
Chapter 2  The Journey to Net Zero
Endnotes  90
Chapter 3  Reducing Emissions across the Economy
3i. Power  94
3ii. Fuel Supply and Hydrogen  107
3iii. Industry  120
3iv. Heat & Buildings  135
3v. Transport  152
3vi. Natural Resources, Waste & F-Gases  167
3vii. Greenhouse Gas Removals  184
Endnotes  197
Chapter 4  Supporting the Transition across the Economy
4i. Innovation for net zero  206
4ii. Green Investment  216
4iii. Green Jobs, Skills, and Industries  229
4iv. Embedding Net Zero in Government  248
4v. Local Climate Action   260
4vi. Empowering the Public and Business to Make Green Choices  273
4vii. International Leadership and Collaboration  284
Endnotes  298
Technical Annex  304
Technical Annex  306
Endnotes  351
Climate Science Annex  360
Climate Science Annex  362
Endnotes  366
5Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Forewords7Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Foreword from the Prime Minister
 Over the last three decades we have already 
reduced our emissions by 44 per cent - while 
growing our economy by over 75 per cent – 
and this strategy sets out our plan for going 
the rest of the way. We will meet the global 
climate emergency but not with panicked, 
short-term or self-destructive measures as 
some have urged. Instead we will unleash the 
unique creative power of capitalism to drive 
the innovation that will bring down the costs 
of going green, so we make net zero a net 
win for people, for industry, for the UK and for 
the planet.
This strategy sets out how we will make 
historic transitions to remove carbon from our 
power, retire the internal combustion engine 
from our vehicles and start to phase out gas 
boilers from our homes. But it also shows 
how we will do this fairly by making carbon-
free alternatives cheaper. We will make sure 
what you pay for green, clean electricity is 
competitive with carbon-laden gas, and with 
most of our electricity coming from the wind 
farms of the North Sea or state-of-the-art 
Our strategy for net zero is to lead the world 
British nuclear reactors we will reduce our 
in ending our contribution to climate change, 
vulnerability to sudden price rises caused by 
while turning this mission into the greatest 
fluctuating international fossil fuel markets.
opportunity for jobs and prosperity for our 
country since the industrial revolution.  The United Kingdom is not afraid to lead the 
charge towards global net zero at COP26, 
Removing dirty fossil fuels from the global 
because history has never been made by 
economy will lead to the creation of vast 
those who sit at the back of the class hoping 
new global industries from offshore wind to 
not to be called on. Indeed, as we set an 
electric vehicles and carbon capture and 
example to the world by showing that reaching 
storage. By moving first and making the 
Net Zero is entirely possible, so the likes of 
United Kingdom the birthplace of the Green 
China and Russia are following our lead with 
Industrial Revolution we are building a defining 
their own net zero targets, as prices tumble 
competitive edge. Through our Ten Point Plan 
and green tech becomes the global norm.
we have already attracted over £5.8 billion 
of new inward investment in just over ten 
months, and will create and support hundreds 
of thousands of new high skilled, high wage 
green jobs.
8Foreword from the Prime Minister
For years, going green was inextricably bound 
up with a sense that we have to sacrifice the 
things we love. But this strategy shows how 
we can build back greener, without so much 
as a hair shirt in sight. In 2050, we will still 
be driving cars, flying planes and heating our 
homes, but our cars will be electric gliding 
silently around our cities, our planes will be 
zero emission allowing us to fly guilt-free, and 
our homes will be heated by cheap reliable 
power drawn from the winds of the North 
Sea. And everywhere you look, in every part 
of our United Kingdom, there will be jobs. 
Good jobs, green jobs, well-paid jobs, levelling 
up our country while squashing down our 
carbon emissions.
That is the clean and prosperous future that 
awaits every one of us as the UK leads the 
world in the race to net zero.
The Rt Hon Boris Johnson MP
Prime Minister
9Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Foreword from the Secretary of 
State for Business, Energy 
& Industrial Strategy
The UK has already taken bold steps towards 
net zero, including bringing forward the end 
of sales of new petrol and diesel cars to 
2030. We have committed over £12 billion 
of domestic green investment since March 
2020, and have doubled our International 
Climate Finance commitment to £11.6 billion 
between 2021-2025.
This Strategy sets out the next steps we 
will take to cut our emissions, seize green 
economic opportunities, and leverage further 
private investment into net zero. The policies 
and spending brought forward in the Net Zero 
Strategy mean that since the Ten Point Plan 
we have mobilised over £26 billion of 
government capital investment for the green 
industrial revolution. Along with regulations, 
this will support 190,000 jobs by 2025, and 
440,000 jobs by 2030, and leverage up to 
£90 billion of private investment by 2030. 
This will put us on an ambitious path to meet 
our Sixth Carbon Budget and our Nationally 
Determined Contribution, cutting emissions 
Now is the time the world needs to go further 
by at least 68% by 2030 on 1990 levels, and 
and faster to tackle climate change. The UK is 
reaching net zero by 2050.
stepping up to that challenge. Here we set out 
our ambitious strategy – the first of its kind in  We know economic growth and reducing 
the world of a major economy - to create new  emissions can go hand-in-hand. As 
jobs, develop new industries with innovative  we continue to build back better from 
new technologies and become a more energy  the COVID-19 pandemic, we will fuel a 
secure nation with clean green British energy.  Green Industrial Revolution, creating jobs 
At the same time we will reduce greenhouse  and business growth opportunities, and 
gas emissions across the economy to reach  establishing the UK as a global leader in the 
net zero by 2050. technologies to tackle climate change. We 
will deliver the commitments in the Prime 
Minister’s Ten Point Plan and Build Back 
Better: our plan for growth, and go further to 
build a resilient economy and level up the UK.
10Foreword from the Secretary of State for Business, Energy & Industrial Strategy
The changes will have wider benefits for  across local and national government, 
the public and businesses alike. We will all  the Devolved Administrations, and with 
enjoy cleaner air, increased biodiversity and  businesses and civil society organisations. And 
improved access to green spaces. We will  we will make it easier and fairer for individuals, 
see greater efficiency in the way we travel  businesses and households to decarbonise, 
and heat our buildings, which will be better  so that our whole society can work together to 
protected from more extreme weather events.  reduce emissions. This strategy demonstrates 
We will also put consumers at the heart of  how the UK is leading by example, with a clear 
this transition, helping them make their homes  plan for the future.
warmer, more efficient, and ensure that they 
The Rt Hon Kwasi Kwarteng  
pay a fair, affordable prices for their energy.
Secretary of State for Business, Energy & 
But we cannot tackle climate change alone.  Industrial Strategy
We will take a coordinated approach, working 
11Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Executive 
Summary13Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
What is net zero and why do we 
need to act? 
From heating our homes to filling up our cars,  But the good news is that there is, still, a path 
burning fossil fuels releases the greenhouses  to avoid catastrophic climate change. The 
gases that increase global temperatures.  science could not be clearer: by the middle of 
We are already seeing the effects here in  this century the world has to reduce emissions 
the UK, with devastating floods in the West  to as close to zero as possible, with the small 
Midlands in January and torrential downpours   amount of remaining emissions absorbed 
submerging London Underground stations  through natural carbon sinks like forests, 
earlier this summer.  and new technologies like carbon capture. 
If we can achieve this, global emissions of 
People are rightly concerned, with the latest 
greenhouse gases will be ‘net zero’. 
IPCC report showing that if we fail to limit 
global warming to 1.5°C above pre-industrial  Delivering this requires urgent global action, 
levels, the floods and fires we have seen  including ending coal fired power generation, 
around the world this year will get more  retiring petrol and diesel engines from all cars, 
frequent and more fierce, crops will be more  and halting deforestation. These are the steps 
likely to fail, and sea levels will rise driving  that the UK is calling for at COP26, the global 
mass migration as millions are forced from  climate change talks in Glasgow next month.
their homes. Above 1.5°C we risk reaching 
climatic tipping points like the melting of arctic 
permafrost – releasing millennia of stored 
greenhouse gases – meaning we could lose 
control of our climate for good. 
14Executive Summary
Why should the UK act first?
Since 1990 the UK has almost halved our  The question is whether the new clean 
greenhouse gas emissions. Thanks to the  machinery of the net zero future will be 
efforts of successive governments, we are  “made elsewhere” or “made in Britain”. By 
almost half-way to ending the UK’s domestic  moving first, the UK can get ahead of the 
contribution to man-made climate change,  pack and make the birthplace of the industrial 
and in 2019 the UK became the first major  revolution the home of the new Green 
economy in the world to legislate to finish the  Industrial Revolution. 
job with a binding target to reach net zero 
Indeed, as we produce more of our own 
emissions by 2050. 
electricity – from wind farms in the North Sea 
We are proud to lead the world in ending  and state-of-the-art British nuclear reactors 
our own contribution to climate change,  – families will be much better protected 
not just because it is the right thing to do,  from energy price spikes caused by volatile 
but because we are determined to seize  international fossil fuel markets. At the same 
the unprecedented economic opportunity it  time, by getting ahead of the curve in driving 
brings. We want to build back better from  down the costs of the latest clean technology, 
the pandemic by building back greener and  more consumers will enjoy more efficient cars 
levelling up our country with new high skilled,  and heating systems sooner. Furthermore, 
high wage, sustainable jobs in every part of  by accelerating the deployment of cheap 
our United Kingdom.  renewable power, and rolling out further 
energy efficiency measures, government 
Removing dirty fossil fuels will require the 
decarbonisation policies mean that the 
transformation of every sector of the global 
average consumer energy bill in 2024 will likely 
economy. It means no longer burning fossil 
be cheaper than it would otherwise have been. 
fuels for power or heating; it means new ways 
of making concrete, cement, steel; it means  We have shown the world that green and 
the end of the petrol and diesel engine. These  growth go hand in hand, and as a result other 
changes are already beginning to happen.  countries are already following our lead with 
Renewable energy is now the cheapest source  their own net zero targets. When the UK was 
of power across two-thirds of the globe.  confirmed as host of COP26, less than 30% 
Clean, cheap power is already driving the  of global GDP was signed up to net zero or 
decarbonisation of heavy industry around the  carbon neutrality targets. Today, in part again 
world. Almost all major car companies are  because of UK leadership, that figure is now 
now developing or producing zero emissions  over 80% – and rising.
vehicles as battery technology improves 
and costs reduce. 
15Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
The Ten Point Plan for a Green 
Industrial Revolution
Last year, the government kick-started its  need for these new high wage green jobs, 
mission to get ahead of the pack, by setting  though our Lifetime Skills Guarantee, and we 
out a Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial  are helping investors to access capital for 
Revolution. Our ambition was to create the  green projects by making the City of London 
conditions for the private sector to invest with  the global centre of Green Finance.
confidence, unleashing the unique creativity 
At the Global Investment Summit in October 
of capitalism to generate and grow new 
2021, the Prime Minister announced a 
green industries. 
package of 18 deals worth £9.7 billion that will 
We mobilised £12 billion of government  support green growth and create an estimated 
investment, shared some of the risks of  30,000 UK jobs. This is on top of the £5.8 
pioneering new industries, and began to  billion already committed for sustainable 
introduce regulations to assure industry of the  projects since the Prime Minister launched his 
future demand for green products – such as  Ten Point Plan in November 2020. Now we 
through our decision to end the sale of new  need to build on this progress with a strategy 
petrol and diesel cars by 2030. We have also  to take us to net zero by 2050.
invested in the skills the British workforce will 
Our Strategy for Net Zero 
Since 1990 the UK has reduced our  3. We will ensure that the most vulnerable 
greenhouse gas emissions by 44%, while  are protected through Government support 
growing our economy by over 75%. This  in the form of energy bill discounts, energy 
strategy sets out this Government’s long- efficiency upgrades, and more
term plan to finish the job and end the UK’s 
4. We will work with businesses to 
domestic contribution to man-made climate 
continue delivering deep cost reductions 
change by 2050.
in low carbon tech through support for 
Although every study shows that the costs of  the latest state of the art kit to bring down 
inaction on climate are far greater, there will, of  costs for consumers and deliver benefits 
course, be costs to the investments needed  for businesses.
to make this transition happen. So we will 
This strategy is a long-term plan for a 
approach these with four key principles:
transition that will take place over the next 
1. We will work with the grain of consumer  three decades. Many of the policies in the 
choice: no one will be required to rip out their  strategy will be phased in over the next 
existing boiler or scrap their current car decade or longer. Given our success in 
decarbonisation to date we are confident 
2. We will ensure the biggest polluters 
in our approach, but this strategy does not 
pay the most for the transition through 
intend to predict the exact shape of the British 
fair carbon pricing
economy in 2050 and neither should it. 
16Executive Summary
We are making the decisions that are needed  We have consistently underestimated how 
now to drive investment into new low carbon  quickly the costs of clean technology would 
technologies and as these develop and we  fall to date. There will be many more decisions 
test our approach, we will make informed  to take, and many more steps on the journey 
decisions over how we scale to reach  to the finish line. But this strategy marks the 
net zero by 2050. beginning of the end of the UK’s domestic 
contribution to climate change.
What is in the Strategy? 
Ending the UK’s contribution to climate  The policies and spending brought forward 
change is a long-term shift, and the Climate  in the Net Zero Strategy mean that since 
Change Act breaks up this challenge  the Ten Point Plan, HMG has mobilised £26 
into bitesize chunks – five-year long  billion of government capital investment for 
carbon budgets.  the green industrial revolution. Along with 
regulations, this will support up to 190,000 
We have hit all of our carbon budgets to date. 
jobs by 2025, and up to 440,000 jobs by 
This document sets out clear policies and 
2030, and leverage up to £90 billion of private 
proposals for keeping us on track for our 
investment by 2030. 
coming carbon budgets, our ambitious 
Nationally Determined Contribution 
(NDC), and then sets out our vision for a 
decarbonised economy in 2050. 
Whilst there are a range of ways in which net 
zero could be achieved in the UK, we set out a 
delivery pathway showing indicative emissions 
reductions across sectors to meet our targets 
up to the sixth carbon budget (2033-2037). 
This is based on our current understanding of 
each sector’s potential, and a whole system 
view of where abatement is most effective. But 
we must be adaptable over time, as innovation 
will increase our understanding of the 
challenges, bring forward new technologies 
and drive down the costs of existing ones. 
17Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Figure 1: Indicative delivery pathway to 2037 by sector
Source: BEIS Analysis (2021)
So this strategy sets out our plans for reducing 
emissions from each sector of our economy, 
while hoovering up any remaining emissions 
with greenhouse gas removals – either 
natural, like trees, or technological, using 
carbon capture. This is an historic plan. Taken 
together the transitions set out below for every 
sector of the UK economy meets Carbon 
Budgets 4 and 5, and puts us on the path for 
Carbon Budget 6 – and ultimately on course 
for net zero by 2050.
18Net Zero Strategy: An overview
Executive Summary
PPoowewr er
 
Going further faster to decarbonise our electricity system
The policies and proposals for power in the Net Zero Strategy will …
Industry and fuel supply
Support forT urapn tsoi t5io9n,0in0g0  to a lowS tcaarrtb too nm foubtuilrisee additional  Fully decarbonise our 
jobs in 2024 and up to  public and private investment  power system by 2035
120,000 jobs in 2030 of £150-270 billion, in line with 
our 2037 delivery pathway
Heat and buildings
Decarbonising how we heat and power our buildings
The net zero economy will be underpinned  renewables, cutting edge new nuclear power 
by cheap clean electricity, made in Britain. A  stations, and be underpinned by flexibility 
clean, reliable power system is the foundation  including storage, gas with CCS, hydrogen 
of a productiTvrea nnestp zoerrto economy as we  and ensure reliable power is always there at 
electrify otheSr estetcintogr sth –e  spoa cwee  fwori lgl frueellyn er, better trathnes pfloicrkt of a switch. The transformation of the 
decarbonise our power system by 2035,  power sector will bring high skill, high wage 
subject to security of supply. Our power  job opportunities right across the UK.
system will consist of abundant, cheap British 
Natural resources, waste, and fluorinated gases
Harnessing nature for net zero
Key policies:
Greenhouse gas removals
•  By 2035 the UK will be powered entirely by clean electricity, subject to 
Balancing residual emissions to achieve net zero
security of supply.
•  Secure a final investment decision on a large-scale nuclear plant by the end of this 
Parliament, and launch a new £120 million Future Nuclear Enabling Fund, retaining 
Innovation and investment
options for future nuclear technologies, including Small Modular Reactors, with a 
Leading the world in innovation and green finance  
number of potential sites including Wylfa in North Wales.
•  40GW of offshore wind by 2030, with more onshore, solar, and other renewables 
– with a new approach to onshore and offshore electricity networks to incorporate 
Green jobs, skills, and industries
new low carbon generation and demand in the most efficient manner that takes 
Creating the skilled workforce to deliver net zero and putting UK 
account of the needs of local communities like those in East Anglia. 
supply chains at the forefront of global markets 
•  Moving towards 1GW of floating offshore wind by 2030 to put us at the forefront of 
this new technology that can utilise our North and Celtic Seas – backed by £380 
Embedding in government and local action
million overall funding for our world-leading offshore wind sector.
Prioritising decarbonisation at every level of government
•  Deployment of new flexibility measures including storage to help smooth out 
future price spikes.
Green choices
Moving towards a net zero society together
19Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Fuel Supply & Hydrogen
 
The policies and proposals for fuel supply and hydrogen in the Net Zero Strategy will…
Support up to 10,000 jobs in  Start to mobilise additional  Deliver 5 GW of hydrogen 
2030 in fuel supply public and private investment  production capacity by 2030, 
of £20-30 billion, in line with  whilst halving emissions 
our 2037 delivery pathway from oil and gas
While electricity will be the primary source  whilst scaling-up the production of low carbon 
of energy, we cannot rely on it alone. Many  alternatives such as hydrogen and biofuels. 
sectors require low carbon energy, including  Current gas prices spikes underline the need 
those where electrification is not a viable  to get off hydrocarbons as quickly as possible, 
option, making the supply of cleaner fuels  but we will manage the transition in a way that 
essential to achieving net zero. Building on  protects jobs and investment, uses existing 
commitments in the North Sea Transition  infrastructure, maintains security of supply, 
Deal, we will significantly reduce emissions  and minimises environmental impacts.
from traditional oil and gas fuel supplies, 
Key policies:
•  We have set up the Industrial Decarbonisation and Hydrogen Revenue Support 
(IDHRS) scheme to fund our new hydrogen and industrial carbon capture business 
models. We will be providing up to £140 million to establish the scheme, including 
up to £100 million to award contracts of up to 250MW of electrolytic hydrogen 
production capacity in 2023 with further allocation in 2024. 
•  Introducing a new climate compatibility checkpoint for future licensing on the UK 
Continental Shelf and regulating the oil and gas sector in a way that minimises 
greenhouse gases through the revised Oil and Gas Authority strategy.
20Net Zero Strategy: An overview
Power
Going further faster to decarbonise our electricity system Executive Summary
Industry
Industry and fuel supply
 
Transitioning to a low carbon future
The policies and proposals for industry in the Net Zero Strategy will…
Heat and buildings
Support upD toe c5a4r,b0o0n0i sjoinbgs  hino w wSeta hrte taot  manodb iplisoew aedr doituior nbaul ildingsDeliver four carbon capture 
2030 in industry public and private investment  usage and storage (CCUS)  
of at least £14 billion in  clusters, capturing 20-30 
industry, in line with our 2037  MtCO2 across the economy, 
Transport
delivery pathway including 6 MtCO  of industrial 
Setting the pace for greener, better transport 2
emissions, per year by 2030
We will decarbonise industry in line with  CCUS and renewable energy will put our 
our net zero Ngoaatulsr awlh rielsst osuimrcueltasn, ewoausstlye , and fluoriinndautestdri agl a‘SsuepserPlaces’ at the forefront of 
transformingH oaurrn iensdsuisntgri anl ahteuarert lfaonrd nse bt yz ero technological development – accelerating 
attracting inward investment, future-proofing  decarbonisation in ‘clusters’, which account 
businesses, and securing high wage, high skill  for approximately half of the UK’s industrial 
jobs. We will do this by supporting industry  emissions. These clusters could have 
Greenhouse gas removals
to switch to cleaner fuels; helping them  the opportunity to access support under 
Balancing residual emissions to achieve net zero
improve their resource and energy efficiency,  government’s CCUS programme, which 
and through fair carbon pricing to drive deep  includes the £1 billion CCS Infrastructure Fund 
decarbonisation of industry. Growing new  and revenue support mechanisms.
industries in Ilonwno cvaartbioonn  haynddro ignevne satlomnegnstide 
Leading the world in innovation and green finance  
Key policies:
Green jobs, skills, and industries
•  Following the Phase 1 of the Cluster Sequencing process, the Hynet and East 
Creating the skilled workforce to deliver net zero and putting UK 
Coast Clusters, will act as economic hubs for green jobs in line with our ambition 
supply chains at the forefront of global markets 
to capture 20-30 MtCO2 per year by 2030. This puts Teesside and the Humber, 
Merseyside and North Wales, along with the North East of Scotland as a reserve 
Embedding in government and local action
cluster, among the potential early SuperPlaces which will be transformed over 
Prioritising decarbonisation at every level of government
the next decade.
•  Future-proofing industrial sectors, and the communities they employ through the 
£315 million Industrial Energy Transformation Fund (IETF), (£289 million for England, 
WalesG arende nN cohrtohiecren sIreland, £26 million for Scotland).
Moving towards a net zero society together
•  Incentivise cost-effective abatement in industry at the pace and scale required to 
deliver net zero, through the UK ETS by consulting on a net zero consistent UK ETS 
cap (in partnership with the Devolved Administrations).
21Net Zero Strategy: An overview
Power
Going further faster to decarbonise our electricity system
Industry and fuel supply
Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Transitioning to a low carbon future
HHeeat aandt b uialdinngsd Buildings
 
Decarbonising how we heat and power our buildings
The policies and proposals for heat and buildings in the Net Zero Strategy will…
Transport
Setting the pace for greener, better transport
Support up to 100,000 jobs n  Start to mobilise additional  Set a path to all new heating 
the middle of the 2020s and  public and private investment  appliances in homes and 
up to 175,000 in 2030 of approximately  £200  workplaces from 2035 
billion, in line with our 2037  being low carbon
Natural resources, waste, and fluorinated gases
delivery pathway
Harnessing nature for net zero
Reaching net zero means tackling all sources  works with the grain of consumer choice. But 
of emissions – and heating for homes and  the costs of low carbon technology can fall 
workspaces Gmraekeensh uopu saelm goasst  ar ethmirodv oafl sall  quickly – working with industry, we expect a 
UK carbon eBmaislasniocninsg. S reos wideu wali lel immipssroiovne s to achiehveea nt eptu zmepro to be as cheap to buy and run as 
the energy efficiency of housing and non- a gas boiler this decade. We want to reduce 
domestic properties across the UK, ensuring  electricity costs so when the current gas 
they require less energy to heat, making them  spike subsides we will look at options to shift 
Innovation and investment
cheaper to run and more comfortable to live  or rebalance energy levies (such as RO and 
Leading the world in innovation and green finance  
and work in while reducing our dependence  FiTs) and obligations (such ECO) away from 
on imported energy. We are setting the  electricity to gas over this decade. This will 
ambition that, by 2035, once costs have come  include looking at options to expand carbon 
down, all newG rheeeanti njogb asp,p slikainllcse, sa inndst ainlleddu sint ries pricing and remove costs from electricity bills 
homes and wCorerkaptilnacge tsh ew isllk bilele ldo ww-ocrakrfboorcne  to delivwerh inlee te nzesurori nagn dth paut twtien gc oUnKti nue to limit any 
technologiess, ulipkep leyl ecchtariicn sh eaatt t phuem foprse foror nt of globaiml mpaacrkt eotns  bills overall. We know that in the 
hydrogen boilers. We will take a decision  long run, green products are more efficient 
in 2026 on the role of hydrogen heating.  and cheaper, and we are putting fairness and 
Embedding in government and local action
Crucially, this will be a gradual transition that  affordability at the heart of our approach.
Prioritising decarbonisation at every level of government
Key policies:
Green choices
•  An amMboitvioinng t htoawt bayrd 2s0 a3 5n,e nt oz enreow s ogacsie btyo tiloegrse wthiell rbe sold.
•  A new £450 million three-year Boiler Upgrade Scheme will see households offered 
grants of up to £5,000 for low-carbon heating systems so they cost the same as a 
gas boiler now.
•  A new £60 million Heat Pump Ready programme that will provide funding for 
pioneering heat pump technologies and will support the government’s target of 
600,000 installations a year by 2028.
•  Delivering cheaper electricity by rebalancing of policy costs from electricity bills to 
gas bills this decade.
22Executive Summary
•  Further funding for the Social Housing Decarbonisation Scheme and Home Upgrade 
Grants, investing £1.75 billion. Additional funding of £1.425 billion for Public Sector 
Decarbonisation, with the aim of reducing emissions from public sector buildings 
by 75% by 2037.
•  Launching a Hydrogen Village trial to inform a decision on the role of hydrogen in the 
heating system by 2026.
23Net Zero Strategy: An overview
Power
Going further faster to decarbonise our electricity system
Industry and fuel supply
Transitioning to a low carbon future
Heat and buildings
Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Decarbonising how we heat and power our buildings
TTrraanspnortsport
 
Setting the pace for greener, better transport
The policies and proposals for transport in the Net Zero Strategy will …
Natural resources, waste, and fluorinated gases
Harnessing nature for net zero
Support for up to 22,000  Start to mobilise additional  Remove all road emissions at 
jobs in 2024 and up to  public and private investment  the tailpipe and kickstart zero 
74,000 jobs in 2030 of around £220 billion,  emissions international travel
in line with our 2037 
Greenhouse gas removals
delivery pathway
Balancing residual emissions to achieve net zero
We will transform our cities and towns with  chargepoint provision. We will increase the 
greener, faster and more efficient transport.  share of journeys taken by public transport, 
Our streets wInilln boev actleioanne ar nadn din pveeosptmle ent cycling and walking, electrifying more railway 
healthier fromL ebardeaintghi nthge c wleoanrledr  iani ri,n wnoalvkaintigo n and glrineeesn,  fiinnvaensctien g  £3 billion to transform bus 
and cycling more. Our zero emissions vehicle  services and £2 billion for cycling. We will 
(ZEV) mandate will guarantee greater number  build on our strong maritime heritage and the 
of zero emission vehicles on our roads,  success of the Clean Maritime Demonstration 
Green jobs, skills, and industries
unlocking the transformation of our road  Competition to deliver a more ambitious multi-
Creating the skilled workforce to deliver net zero and putting UK 
transport. Additional funding will support our  year programme for the sector. Setting out 
supply chains at the forefront of global markets 
automotive sector to stay at the cutting edge  an ambitious position on SAF will set us on a 
and capture jobs of the future. Significant  path to decarbonise this challenging sector. 
new investmEenmt bine vdedhinicgle  ignr agnotvse arnndm eelenctt raicn d locaAl caccetlieornating the decarbonisation of transport 
vehicle infrasPtrruiocrtiutirsei nwgil ld eencsaurrbeo tnhiasta wtioen  at every lewviell ls oafv eg olivveesrn amnden stignificantly reduce noise, 
see even more green vans delivering our  making our urban centres more enjoyable 
goods and big improvements in local public  places to live.
Green choices
Moving towards a net zero society together
Key policies:
•  A zero emission vehicle mandate to improve consumer choice and ensure we 
maximise the economic benefit from this transition by giving a clear signal to 
investors. This will deliver on our 2030 commitment to end the sale of new 
petrol and diesel cars, and 2035 commitment that all cars must be fully zero 
emissions capable.
•  Further funding of £620 million for zero emission vehicle grants and EV 
Infrastructure, including further funding for local EV Infrastructure, with a focus on 
local on street residential charging.
•  Allocating a further £350 million of our up to £1 billion Automotive Transformation 
Fund (ATF) to support the electrification of UK vehicles and their supply chains.
•  Building on the success of our £20 million zero emission road freight trials, we will 
expand these to trial three zero emission HGV technologies at scale on UK roads to 
determine their operational benefits, as well as their infrastructure needs.
24Executive Summary
•  £2 billion investment which will help enable half of journeys in towns and cities to be 
cycled or walked by 2030. 
•  £3 billion to create integrated bus networks, more frequent services and bus lanes 
to speed journeys.
•  Transformation of local transport systems, with 4,000 new zero emission buses and 
the infrastructure to support them, and a net zero rail network by 2050, with the 
ambition to remove all diesel-only trains by 2040. 
•  Building on the success of the Clean Maritime Demonstration Competition, we will 
be extending this to a multi-year programme, delivering real-world demonstrations 
and technology trials of clean maritime vessels and infrastructure to decarbonise 
the maritime sector. This is part of our commitment to a UK Shipping Office for 
Reducing Emissions.
•  Significant investment in rail electrification and city rapid transit systems.
•  Aim to become a world-leader in zero emission flight and kick-starting the 
commercialisation of the UK sustainable aviation fuel so people can fly, and connect 
without guilt. Our ambition is to enable delivery of 10% SAF by 2030 and will be 
supporting UK industry with £180 million funding for the development of SAF plants. 
25Net Zero Strategy: An overview
Power
Going further faster to decarbonise our electricity system
Industry and fuel supply
Transitioning to a low carbon future
Heat and buildings
Decarbonising how we heat and power our buildings
Net Zero StrTartaengsyp: oBrutild Back Greener
Setting the pace for greener, better transport
Natural Resources, waste and 
   
Natural resources, waste, and fluorinated gases
flHuarneossirngi nnataure tfoer nedt ze rogases
The policieGs raenedn phrooupsoes aglsa sfo rre nmaotuvraalls resources, waste, and fluorinated gases in the Net 
Zero StrateBgay lawnilcl…ing residual emissions to achieve net zero
New employment  Start to mobilise additional  Treble woodland creation 
opportunities across the UK.  public and private investment  rates in England, contributing 
Innovation and investment
Afforestation in England could  of approximately £30  to the UK’s overall target of 
Leading the world in innovation and green finance  
support up to 1,900 jobs in  billion, in line with our 2037  increasing planting rates to 
2024 and 2,000 jobs in 2030 delivery pathway 30,000 hectares per year by 
the end of this Parliament
Green jobs, skills, and industries
Halting climaCter ecahtainngg eth aen sdk pillreodte wctoinrgk ftohrec en atotu drael liwveorr ldn eatr ez etrwoo a snidde psu ottf inthge  UsKam  e coin, so we will 
restore our csouupnptrlyys cidhea itnos r eadt uthcee  feomreisfrsoionnt so, fs gelqoubeasl tmera crakrebtos n and build our resilience to climate 
change at the same time. We will support farmers to implement a range of low carbon farming 
practices that can help increase productivity and enable more efficient use of land, such as 
Embedding in government and local action
through agroforestry. We will increase tree planting to sequester carbon, and protect and restore 
Prioritising decarbonisation at every level of government
our peatlands. As part of reforms to the resources and waste system, we also will move towards 
a circular economy, improve resource efficiency, and achieve near elimination of biodegradable 
waste to landfill. We will continue to phase down the use of F-gases in line with domestic 
regulations and international commitments. 
Green choices
Moving towards a net zero society together
Key policies:
•  Supporting low-carbon farming and agricultural innovation through the Farming 
Investment Fund and the Farming Innovation Programme to invest in equipment, 
technology, and infrastructure to improve profitability, benefit the environment and 
support emissions reductions.
•  We will boost the existing £640 million Nature for Climate Fund with a further £124 
million of new money, ensuring total spend of more than £750 million by 2025 on 
peat restoration, woodland creation and management – above and beyond what 
was promised in the manifesto. This will enable more opportunities for farmers and 
landowners to support Net Zero through land use change. 
•  Restoring approximately 280,000 hectares of peat in England by 2050 and trebling 
woodland creation rates in England, contributing to the UK’s overall target of 
increasing planting rates to 30,000 hectares per year by the end of the Parliament. 
•  £75 million on net zero related R&D across Natural Resources, Waste & F-gases, to 
inform our pathway to 2037.
26Executive Summary
•  To support our commitment to explore options for the near elimination of 
biodegradable municipal waste to landfill from 2028, we are bringing forward £295 
million of capital funding which will allow local authorities in England to prepare to 
implement free separate food waste collections for all households from 2025. 
27Net Zero Strategy: An overview
Power
Going further faster to decarbonise our electricity system
Industry and fuel supply
Transitioning to a low carbon future
Heat and buildings
Decarbonising how we heat and power our buildings
Transport
Setting the pace for greener, better transport
Natural resources, waste, and fluorinated gases
Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Harnessing nature for net zero
Greenhouse Gas Removals
Greenhouse gas removals
 
Balancing residual emissions to achieve net zero
The policies and proposals for GGRs in the Net Zero Strategy will provide…
Innovation and investment
New, highlyL sekaildleidng, j othbes  wino oruldr  in Sintanrot vtoa tmioonb ailnisde  gardedeintio fninaal nce  An ambition to deploy 
industrial heartlands public and private  at least 5 MtCO /year of 
2
investment of around £20  engineered GGRs by 2030.
billion, in line with our 2037 
Green jobs, skills, and industries
delivery pathway
Creating the skilled workforce to deliver net zero and putting UK 
supply chains at the forefront of global markets 
Our most important step to achieving net zero  Government intervention in the short term 
is to take ambitious decarbonisation measures  will support early commercial deployment of 
Embedding in government and local action
across society. However, greenhouse gas  GGRs, with an ambition to move towards a 
Prioritising decarbonisation at every level of government
removals (GGRs) will also play a critical role  market-based framework for GGRs. This will 
in balancing residual emissions from the  support our delivery of net zero emissions and 
hardest to decarbonise sectors such as  position us to export our skills and expertise, 
aviation, agriculture, and heavy industry. Our  capitalising on economic opportunities for the 
Green choices
innovation-led approach position the UK as a  UK and supporting the global shift to net zero.
Moving towards a net zero society together
global leader in this rapidly developing sector. 
Key policies:
•  Delivering £100 million of investment in GGR innovation could enable further 
deployment of GGRs, which in turn will leverage private investment and demand for 
transferrable engineering expertise from the UK’s oil and gas sector.
•  Explore options for regulatory oversight to provide robust monitoring, reporting and 
verification (MRV) of GGRs, following the recommendations of the BEIS-led MRV 
Task & Finish Group involving experts from industry and academia.
28Net Zero Strategy: An overview
Power
Going further faster to decarbonise our electricity system
Industry and fuel supply
Transitioning to a low carbon future
Heat and buildings
Decarbonising how we heat and power our buildings
Transport
Setting the pace for greener, better transport
Natural resources, waste, and fluorinated gases
Harnessing nature for net zero
Greenhouse gas removals
Balancing residual emissions to achieve net zero
Innovation and investment
Leading the world in innovation and green finance  
Green jobs, skills, and industries
Creating the skilled workforce to deliver net zero and putting UK 
supply chains at the forefront of global markets 
Embedding in government and local action
Prioritising decarbonisation at every level of government
Executive Summary
Green choices
Moving towards a net zero society together
Supporting the transition with 
   
cross-cutting action
We will maximise the opportunities of this  We will put consumers at the heart of the 
transition, and make sure we are geared  transition and our goal is to make choosing 
up to deliver these changes by also taking  green options significantly easier, cheaper, 
cross-cutting action. As the host nation  and more rewarding. We will back training 
for COP26 in Glasgow this year, we will  and skills, supporting workers to retrain and 
use our global platform to continue to urge  upskill and build low carbon industries with 
countries to set targets to get to net zero by  strong UK supply chains that are resilient to 
2050, and more ambitious 2030 emissions  changes. We will also take a place-based 
reduction targets to get us there. We will  approach to net zero, working with local 
back innovation and our world-leading green  government to ensure that all local areas have 
finance sector. We will support each stage of  the capability and capacity for net zero delivery 
the innovation chain to drive down costs and  as we level up the country. And Government 
bring through key technologies and ideas to  is leading the way – embedding climate into 
meet net zero. We will work with the private  our policy and spending decisions, increasing 
sector to leverage private investment to  the transparency of our progress on climate 
provide the finance needed, while providing  goals, and providing funding to drive ambitious 
the conditions for green finance to flourish.  emissions reductions in schools and hospitals. 
Key policies: 
•  Deliver at least £1.5 billion of funding to support net zero innovation projects.
•  Use the UK Infrastructure Bank (UKIB) to crowd in private finance, support more 
than £40 billion of investment, and pull through low carbon technologies and 
sectors to maturity and scale.
•  Introduce a new Sustainability Disclosures Regime, including mandatory climate 
related financial disclosures and a UK green taxonomy.
•  Reform the skills system so that training providers, employers and learners are 
incentivised and equipped to play their part in delivering the transition to net zero.
•  Publish an annual progress update against a set of key indicators for achieving our 
climate goals. 
29Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Delivering the Prime Minister’s Ten Point Plan
In the past year, we have already taken important action on climate change, delivering on the 
commitments in the Prime Minister’s Ten Point Plan. 
56,000 jobs have been protected and created over the last ten months, since the publication 
of the Prime Minister’s Ten Point Plan and wider green agenda - with some already on line and 
others set to come on line over the coming decade 
We committed to… Since then we have…
Point 1: Advancing Offshore  –  Supported manufacturers via government investment schemes. Six 
Wind, including: manufacturers have already announced major investments in the UK 
offshore wind sectors and delivering up to 3,600 jobs by 2030.
–  40GW of offshore wind 
by 2030 including 1GW of  –  Built our Offshore Wind capacity to 10.5GW, enough in 2020 to power 
floating wind (wind turbines  4.5 trillion LED light bulbs. This increased our share of electricity 
generating electricity  generated by Offshore Wind from 1% to 13% over the last decade.
in water depths) 
–  Kicked off the biggest-ever round of our flagship renewable energy 
–  £160 million into modern  scheme for low carbon electricity (Contract for Difference) with £200 
ports and manufacturing  million for offshore wind projects and £24m for floating offshore wind. 
infrastructure 
–  Launched a £17.5 million competition to support innovative floating 
–  The Offshore  wind ideas from industry and joined the ORE Catapult’s FOW Centre of 
Transmission Network Review Excellence, contributing £2 million. 
–  Leveraged over £1.5 billion investment into our offshore wind industry, 
following the £160 million to upgrade ports and infrastructure. 
–  Published the Offshore Transmission Network Review, setting out two 
initial policy consultations to move to a coordinated approach for both in-
flight and future offshore wind projects.
Point 2: Driving the Growth  –  Published the Hydrogen Strategy, setting out our comprehensive 
of Low Carbon Hydrogen,  approach to growing the UK hydrogen economy. 
including: 
–  Commenced an allocation process for electrolytic hydrogen in 2022 to 
–  An ambition for 5GW of low  award up to 100MW of contracts in 2023 and up to 400MW of contracts 
carbon hydrogen production  in 2024 and announcing a funding envelope in 2022 that will enable 
capacity by 2030 us to award the first contracts to CCUS-enabled hydrogen from 2023 
through the Cluster Sequencing process, to deliver up to 1GW of CCUS-
–  £240 million Net 
enabled hydrogen.
Zero Hydrogen Fund
–  Following our consultation on a proposed hydrogen business model, 
–  Hydrogen trials to test use of 
design of the £240 million Net Zero Hydrogen Fund and on a UK low 
hydrogen in heating
carbon hydrogen standard.
–  Invested £3 million to kick start the Tees Valley hydrogen transport hub, 
which is building early collaborations and operational learning.
–  Announced a £60 million competition to fund projects to develop 
innovative low carbon hydrogen supply solutions. 
–  Started preparations for a hydrogen heating neighbourhood trial in 
Levenmouth, Fife led by SGN following funding awards by Ofgem and 
Scottish Government. 
30Executive Summary
We committed to… Since then we have…
Point 3: Delivering New and  –  Announced our aim to bring at least one large-scale nuclear project to the 
Advanced Nuclear Power,  point of Final Investment Decision by the end of this Parliament, subject 
including: to value for money and all relevant approvals. Entered into negotiations 
with the developer of Sizewell C power station in December 2020.
–  Pursuing large-scale 
nuclear projects, subject to  –  Launched a Call for Evidence on Government’s preference to explore the 
value for money potential of High Temperature Gas Reactors (HTGRs) to enable an AMR 
demonstration by the early 2030s.
–  Legislating for a new financing 
model for nuclear projects
–  £385 million Advanced 
Nuclear Fund to enable up 
to £215 million into Small 
Modular Reactors
–  £170 million for a R&D 
programme on Advanced 
Modular Reactors
Point 4: Accelerating the Shift  –  Announced we will introduce a ZEV mandate to deliver our end of sales 
to Zero Emission Vehicles,  dates for new petrol and diesel cars and vans.
including:
–  Announced funding for the UK’s first large-scale gigafactory as part of the 
–  End the sale of new pure  Automotive Transformation Fund. The investor has committed to creating 
petrol and diesel cars and  1,000 jobs which will be realised during the period to 2025/26 as the 
vans by 2030 and consult on  facility is built and becomes operational. 
phase out for diesel HGVs
–  Secured an additional 950 jobs through other automotive projects, for a 
–  £1 billion to support  total of 1,950 jobs to be realised through to 2025/26.
electrification of UK vehicles 
–  Built on existing successful projects, such as the Advanced Propulsion 
and their supply chains
Centre - according to participating companies, APC projects agreed this 
–  £1.3 billion to accelerate  year will support up to 5,200 direct jobs. 
the roll-out of charging 
–  Seen increased demand for ZEVs – industry figures state that nearly one 
infrastructure 
in ten of all new cars sold so far this year in the UK is fully electric and 
–  Publish a Green Paper in  over 650,000 plug-in cars have been registered in the UK since 2010.
2021 on the UK’s post-EU 
–  For this financial year, committed £70 million to roll out home, on-street 
emissions regulation 
and workplace chargepoints. 
–  70% of motorway service areas now have plans to install at least 6 high-
powered chargers by 2023.
–  Announced the winners of the £20 million Zero Emission Road Freight 
Trials – projects that will help to design and develop cost-effective, zero 
emission HGVs and refuelling infrastructure.
–  Consulted on the phase out of non-zero emission HGVs.
31Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
We committed to… Since then we have…
Point 5: Green Public Transport,  –  Launched the National Bus Strategy and a consultation on phase out of 
Cycling and Walking, including: new non-zero emission buses and the £120 million Zero Emission Bus 
Regional Area (ZEBRA) scheme to support local transport authorities 
–  £120 million to begin 
outside London.
introducing at least 4,000 
zero emission buses –  Supported Coventry to become UK’s first all-electric bus city, with £50 
million to fund up to 300 electric buses and charging infrastructure.
–  Billions of pounds in 
enhancements and renewals  –  Committed £17.5 billion in the November 2020 Spending Review in 
of the rail network capital funding for renewals, upgrades, and enhancements of the existing 
rail network up to 2024.
–  £5 billion to support buses, 
cycling and walking  –  Delivered more than 300 walking and cycling schemes.
Point 6: Jet Zero and Green  –  Consulted on our proposals for reaching net zero aviation by 2050 
Ships, including: and following a consultation on a UK Sustainable Aviation Fuels (SAF) 
mandate, confirmed our ambition for it to enable delivery of 10% 
–  A Jet Zero Council
SAF by 2030 , and we will make £180 million available to support the 
development of the UK SAF industry. 
–  £15 million to 
support production of 
–  Announced the shortlist for the £15 million Green Fuels, Green Skies 
Sustainable Aviation Fuels
competition, to support UK pioneers in Sustainable Aviation Fuels. 
–  £20 million for the 
–  Co-invested £150 million per year through the Aerospace Technology 
Clean Maritime 
Institute to support greener aircraft technology like Rolls-Royce’s next gen 
Demonstration Programme 
UltraFan jet engine which aims to cut emissions by 25% and ZeroAvia’s 
zero-emission hydrogen propulsion system.
–  Allocated up to £23 million of match-funding to 55 projects through the 
Clean Maritime Demonstration Competition to support the development 
of zero emission technologies and greener ports. 
Point 7: Greener Buildings,  –  Supported approximately 45,000 jobs in greener buildings in the first year 
including: since the Ten Point Plan was launched.1 
–  Ambition to install 600,000  –  Announced that we will tighten Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards 
heat pumps per year by 2028 to ensure that landlords can no longer let properties covered by the 
Domestic Minimum Energy Efficiency Standards Regulations if they have 
–  Energy efficiency funding, 
an EPC rating below E, unless they have a valid exemption in place.
including the Public Sector 
Decarbonisation Scheme  –  Allocated £1 billion funds from the Public Sector Decarbonisation 
and Social Housing  Scheme, supporting up to 30,000 jobs.2
Decarbonisation Fund
–  Awarded £62 million to 19 projects in the Social Housing Decarbonisation 
–  Strengthened energy  Fund Demonstrator, with over 2,300 homes in the process of 
efficiency requirements for  being improved.
private sector landlords
32Executive Summary
We committed to… Since then we have…
Point 8: Investing in Carbon  –  We have set up the Industrial Decarbonisation and Hydrogen Revenue 
Capture, Usage and Storage,  Support (IDHRS) scheme, providing up to up to £140 million to fund our 
including new hydrogen and industrial carbon capture business models.
–  Commitment for two industrial  –  Announced £19.5 million of grant funding for projects developing novel 
clusters by mid 2020s, and  CCUS technology and processes that reduce the cost of deployment.
an aim for four sites by 2030, 
–  Kicked off the process to decide the first carbon capture cluster locations 
capturing up to 10Mt CO2 
in our industrial heartlands.
emissions per year
–  Published details of the design of funding mechanisms, including the 
–  £1 billion CCUS 
business model for CO  transport and storage, industrial CCUS, power 
Infrastructure Fund  2
CCUS, as well as the CCS Infrastructure Fund.
Point 9: Protecting Our Natural  –  Supported an estimated 850 jobs in environmental protection 
Environment, including and enhancement. 
–  £5.2 billion for flood and  –  Launched the floods investment programme that is on track to better 
coastal defences protect 336,000 properties from flooding. 
–  New National Parks and Areas  –  Natural England has set out plans to start the process to designate 
of Outstanding Natural Beauty four new areas of outstanding natural beauty - Yorkshire Wolds AONB, 
Cheshire Sandstone Ridge AONB, an extension to the Surrey Hills AONB, 
–  £40 million second 
and an extension to the Chilterns AONB. 
round for the Green 
Recovery Challenge Fund –  Announced 90 projects awarded grants under round 2 of the £80 million 
Green Recovery Challenge Fund (GRCF). Across all 159 projects, the 
–  Establish 10 long-term 
GRCF is set to plant almost 1 million trees and create and retain up 
Landscape Recovery projects 
to 2,500 jobs. 
over the next four years
–  Held three Landscape Recovery market engagement events and, subject 
to feedback, we aim to open applications for the first wave of pilot 
projects later this year.
–  Launched several schemes under the Nature for Climate Fund to expand 
our pipeline of tree planting and peatland restoration projects in England, 
including the new England Woodland Creation Offer and Tree Production 
Innovation Fund.
Point 10: Green Finance and  –  Launched the Net Zero Innovation Portfoliow, providing funding for 
Innovation, including low-carbon technologies and systems across the areas of the 10 Point 
Plan, including:
–  £1 billion Net Zero Innovation 
Portfolio (NZIP), including  –  Up to £68 million across two competition streams for Longer Duration 
£100 million for Direct  Energy Storage Demonstration.
Air Capture and other 
–  Funding for the first phase of GGR studies, which could remove 
Greenhouse Gas Removal 
between 100 and 1,000 tonnes of CO eper year in 2025.
(GGR) technologies  2  
–  Issued £10 billion Sovereign Green Bond, to raise money for green 
–  UK’s first 
government projects like zero-emission buses, offshore wind, and 
Sovereign Green Bond
decarbonising homes. 
–  Green Jobs Taskforce
–  Launched the Green Jobs Taskforce in November 2020, which reported 
15 recommendations in July 2021.
33Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Endnotes
1  Estimate based on internal HMG analysis.
2  This figure is already included in the headline 45,000 figure for greener buildings.
34Executive Summary
35Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Why Net Zero
1
Chapter37Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Levelling up the country, ending 
our domestic contribution to 
climate change, and leading 
the world to a greener, more 
sustainable future
The case for action
1. We are at a crossroads in our history. As  Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) shows,2 
we recover from the impact of the pandemic  this is no longer a challenge for tomorrow: 
on our lives and livelihoods, we know that  we are already seeing the impacts today 
it will not be enough to go back to the way  with increased incidence of events such as 
things were before. The science is clear, we  extreme heat, floods, and wildfires across the 
know that human activity is changing our  globe. We need to act urgently and reduce 
climate and that this will have a devasting  emissions globally to limit further global 
impact on human lives, the economy, and the  warming. The landmark 2015 Paris Agreement 
natural world – ranging from the extinction  agreed to hold the increase in the global 
of some species and the melting of ice caps  average temperature to well below 2°C above 
to extreme weather patterns threatening our  pre-industrial levels, and to pursue efforts to 
homes, businesses, and communities.1 As  limit it to 1.5°C.
the latest report by the Intergovernmental 
38Chapter 1 – Why Net Zero
The UK’s net zero target
The UK was the first major economy to create a legally binding target to 
bring greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 2050. This target was set 
considering the latest scientific evidence and was recommended by the 
Climate Change Committee (CCC), the UK’s independent climate advisory 
body. The net zero target also responds to the overwhelming public support 
for acting on climate change. In recent surveys of the UK public, 80% of 
participants expressed concern about climate change.3
Government is committed to ambitious decarbonisation measures across 
society. However, we know that this does not mean emissions will drop to 
absolute zero by 2050 – we acknowledge that sectors such as industry, 
agriculture, and aviation are difficult to decarbonise completely. Greenhouse 
gas removals (GGR), like trees and carbon capture and storage technology, 
are therefore essential to compensate for the residual emissions arising from 
these hard to decarbonise sectors, so we can reach net zero by 2050.
2. The sooner we act on climate change  markets which have caused the recent spike 
the lower the costs will be. Globally, the  in gas prices. 
costs of failing to get climate change under 
3. The UK has long led the way in tackling 
control would far exceed the costs of bringing 
climate change, and immediate action to 
greenhouse gas emissions down to net 
reduce emissions brings enormous economic 
zero. The Office for Budget Responsibility 
opportunities to revitalise our economy and 
concluded that there could be significant 
deliver on our priority to level up the country. 
fiscal benefits from early action to transition 
Across the globe, as governments, people and 
to net zero, meaning the costs will be lower 
businesses rise to this challenge, a growing 
than if we delay.4 Delaying action would 
global green economy has the potential to 
only serve to put future generations at risk 
create millions of new jobs. We are uniquely 
of crossing critical thresholds resulting in 
placed to seize this once-in-a generation 
severe and irreversible changes to the planet, 
opportunity and deliver a transition to net zero 
the environment, and human society. On 
that has the potential to create thousands of 
the other hand, early and ambitious action 
jobs in every part of the UK.
would help protect lives and livelihoods, while 
maximising the co-benefits for people, society,  4. We must, therefore, build back better. Our 
the environment, and the economy.5 As part  vision, building on the Prime Minister’s Ten 
of the transition to net zero emissions, we will  Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution, is 
transform our energy system away from fossil  to level up our country with new green jobs, 
fuels to low carbon sources of energy, such as  end our contribution to climate change, and 
renewable electricity generated in the UK. This  reverse the decline of our natural environment, 
will ensure sustainable and affordable energy  leading the world to a greener, more 
supplies and protect consumers by reducing  sustainable future.
our exposure to volatile international fossil fuel 
39Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Plan for Growth and green 
sector vision
This strategy sets out how we will build on  Build Back Better: Our Plan for Growth 
the Prime Minister’s Ten Point Plan with  sets out the Government’s commitment to 
our vision to create new jobs and net zero  supporting future growth sectors based on 
industries as we meet our climate targets.  the UK’s comparative advantage and growth 
In turn, this will support levelling up the  potential, and commits to publishing sector 
country, and put the UK at the forefront of the  visions across these sectors. This strategy 
global green markets. articulates our vision for the green economy. 
We will build on this with more detail in further 
We are laying the foundations for businesses 
Sector and Supply Chain Development Plans 
to invest in the UK’s green economy, taking 
– such as the CCUS supply chains roadmap 
action to ensure we have the right skills 
published earlier this year, and the Hydrogen 
to deliver a green industrial revolution and 
Sector Development Action Plan which we will 
committing to work with industry to develop 
publish in 2022.
sector and supply chain action plans in areas 
where the UK has an economic advantage.
4400Chapter 1 – Why Net Zero
Driving a green industrial revolution and levelling up the UK
5. The UK has long proved that tackling  carbon economy and its supply chains across 
climate change and delivering economic  the country, with an estimated turnover of 
growth can go hand in hand. Between 1990  £42.6 billion in 2019.8 These numbers are 
and 2019, we cut emissions faster than any  even higher once we account for the jobs 
other G7 country, a 44% reduction.6 We  and economic activity supporting broader 
achieved this whilst growing our economy  environmental policies such as climate 
by 78%.7 Our latest official estimates show  adaptation and biodiversity. 
that 410,000 people work in the UK’s low 
Figure 2: UK vs Rest of G7 GDP and GHG Emissions9
200
UK GDP +78%
180
160 Rest of G7 GDP +72%
)
0 140
0
1
=
0 120
0
9
1
( 100
 
x Rest of G7 emissions -4%
e
d 80
n
I
60
UK emissions -44%
40
20
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Source: The World Bank, UNFCCC National Inventory Submissions, ONS, BEIS Greenhouse Gas 
Inventory.
6. As the world moves to tackle climate  City of London is long established as a 
change, new opportunities will arise for UK  leader in green finance.11 In the long term, 
companies in domestic and international  evidence from the Energy Innovation Needs 
markets. Updated analysis, based on the BEIS  Assessment (2019) and subsequent analysis, 
Energy Innovation Needs Assessment (EINA)  point to domestic and export opportunities 
suggests key net zero aligned sectors in the  for the UK in electric vehicle technologies and 
UK could contribute up to £60 billion of gross  manufacturing, the next generation of offshore 
value added (GVA) a year by 2050.10 wind (including new approaches such as 
floating offshore wind), carbon capture, usage 
7. We have immediate opportunities to 
and storage (CCUS), low carbon hydrogen, 
capitalise on our core strengths: the largest 
smart energy systems and storage, and direct 
market for offshore wind in the world, a 
air carbon capture and storage (DACCS).
world-class oil and gas sector, and the 
41Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
8. The opportunities for British innovation,  of new opportunities in the green economy. 
expertise, and products will not just be  But the link between net zero and levelling 
confined to these shores. The value of goods  up is wider than just the economy, net zero 
and services exported by UK low carbon and  can deliver wider benefits for people and 
renewable energy businesses exceeds £7  communities across the UK by helping spread 
billion.12 The net zero transition will create new  opportunity and restore pride in place. 
growth opportunities for UK based companies, 
10. We are already taking action to make 
such as Livingstone based FoundOcean 
the most of these opportunities. We have 
and Trelleborg’s North West England based 
embedded a net zero principle in our levelling 
operation, who won contracts with the 
up funding initiatives, such as the Levelling 
support of UK Export Finance (UKEF) to 
Up Fund and the Towns Fund, so that these 
supply Taiwan’s growing offshore wind market.
schemes can contribute to meeting our net 
9. These opportunities show that net zero  zero targets and help places to reduce their 
and levelling up go hand in hand. Delivering  carbon impacts. Later this year, we will publish 
net zero allows us to boost living standards by  a Levelling Up White Paper. This will build on 
supporting jobs and attracting investment in  the actions the government is already taking 
the green industries of the future, which can  to both deliver net zero and level up across 
be in areas that need this the most. Crucially,  the country, including the ones set out in 
delivering net zero also involves supporting  this strategy, and set out new interventions 
workers employed in high carbon industries  to improve livelihoods and drive economic 
that will be affected by the transition, by giving  growth in all parts of the UK.
them the skills they need to make the most 
Maximising opportunities after leaving the EU
Following the UK’s departure from the European Union in January 2020 the UK now has 
the flexibility to determine our own decarbonisation pathways to 2050, in a way that fully 
utilises the unique strengths and opportunities of UK diplomacy, industry and innovation.
Since leaving the EU, the UK has built on our climate leadership, demonstrating an 
independent and ambitious approach to meeting our 2050 target:
•  Setting an ambitious Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) under the Paris 
Agreement, committing to the fastest rate of reducing emissions on 1990 levels of 
any major economy.
•  Setting out ambitious plans with bold policy action across key sectors of the 
economy, such as the Prime Minister’s Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial 
Revolution, the Energy White Paper, North Sea Transition Deal, Industrial 
Decarbonisation Strategy, Transport Decarbonisation Plan, Hydrogen Strategy, and 
the Heat and Buildings Strategy.
•  Establishing a UK Emissions Trading Scheme (UK ETS), to replace the UK’s 
participation in the EU ETS, that demonstrates the UK’s commitment to carbon 
pricing as an effective tool that will help fulfil our climate change objectives. The UK 
ETS will be aligned to our net zero target, giving industry the certainty they need to 
invest in low carbon technologies.
42Chapter 1 – Why Net Zero
Supporting green jobs across the UK 14. The impact of the transition to net zero on 
the UK’s labour market could be significant: 
11. Last year, the Prime Minister set out 
with one estimate suggesting up to 20% of 
his Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial 
the workforce could see demand for their 
Revolution, laying the foundations for a 
skills affected, either positively or negatively.13 
green economic recovery from the impact of 
Furthermore, as set out by HM Treasury’s Net 
COVID-19, outlining how we will level up the 
Zero Review, although the net macroeconomic 
country and put the UK at the forefront of the 
impact is likely to be small in 2050 relative to 
growing global green economy. 
total growth over the period, impacts between 
and within regions over the next three decades 
12. This strategy builds upon that approach: 
can vary. Our approach will need to reflect 
the package of policies will support up to 
that benefits and impacts of the transition 
190,000 jobs by the middle of the 2020s 
will be dependent on individual household 
and up to 440,000 jobs in 2030. These 
characteristics, such as their housing type and 
jobs will contribute to our wider ambition 
current vehicle usage, to support those low-
of 2 million green jobs by 2030, which also 
income households most affected by individual 
factor in employment that contributes to 
technology transitions.
other environmental goals. Updated analysis 
suggests that around 56,000 green jobs 
15. Our approach to supporting green jobs, 
have been secured or created across the UK 
attracting private investment, and tackling 
economy, with some being already online and 
climate change will benefit the whole of the 
others in the pipeline over the next decade.
UK, including areas where a large proportion 
of people are currently employed in high-
13. There will be opportunities for each region 
carbon sectors. However, while employment 
of the UK. For example, we are supporting 
opportunities in green industries will emerge, 
new investment in hydrogen and CCUS into 
high-carbon sectors will have to adapt or 
industrial clusters across the UK. We are also 
decline, resulting in a need to transition local 
driving the electrification of vehicles impacting 
labour markets to ensure people have the right 
manufacturing and supply chains in Wales, the 
skills to make the most of these opportunities.
Midlands and North East England, developing 
Gigafactories in the UK, accelerating the roll 
16. Our sector deals, including on nuclear, 
out of charging infrastructure across the UK, 
offshore wind, automotive and the North Sea 
and supporting roll-out of zero emission buses 
Transition Deal considered the skills needs 
which would boost manufacturers in Scotland 
and support for the labour market transition 
and Northern Ireland. We are also supporting 
to net zero on a sectoral basis. The North 
the development of new offshore wind power 
Sea Transition Deal, for example, will support 
off the coast of England, Scotland, and Wales; 
workers, businesses, and the supply chain 
and already investing in nuclear power in the 
throughout the transition by harnessing the 
South East and West of England.
sector’s existing capabilities, infrastructure, 
and private investment potential to exploit 
new and emerging technologies such as 
hydrogen production, CCUS, offshore wind 
and decommissioning. Through the Deal, 
the sector, government, and unions will work 
together over the next decade and beyond 
to deliver the skills, innovation, and new 
infrastructure required to decarbonise North 
Sea production.
43Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
17. Our Automotive Transformation Fund and 
industrial clusters framework will help these 
industries, transition to a sustainable future. 
We are also taking action to enable local 
employers to set out their green skills needs, 
and support workers to gain the skills they 
need to access green jobs - such as through 
our Skills Bootcamps.   
18. Supporting innovation will also help unlock 
jobs across low carbon sectors. For example, 
our portfolio of net zero innovation will provide 
at least £1.5 billion of government funding to 
help commercialise clean technologies and 
boost private investment across the UK.
44Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Examples of clean growth investment across the UK
Scotland, Aberdeen Scotland, Orkney
Scotland has a technology hub  Hydrogen in an Integrated 
for offshore wind, including the  Maritime Energy Transition’ 
first successful floating turbines in  project £1.6 million from the UK 
Aberdeen. The city is benefiting  Government match-funding a 
from funding for the Aberdeen  £2.3 million project to develop 
Energy Transition Zone and the  hydrogen-based clean maritime 
Global Underwater Hub, as well  solutions.
as the Net Zero Technology 
Transition Programme. 
Wales Wales, Cwmbran Northern Ireland, 
Belfast
South Wales Industrial Cluster  EPIC - Electric Powertrain 
Nearly £20 million to support the  Integration for heavy  Wrightbus zero-emission 
Commercial vehicles £31.8  buses £11.2 million from the 
deployment of decarbonisaton 
million project (£15.8 million from  UK Government to develop 
infrastructure will go to the South 
the UK government) to develop  hydrogen-fuel technology.
Wales Industrial Cluster which  lightweight electric powertrains 
aims to create a net zero industrial  for heavy goods to manage 
zone from Pembrokeshire to the  extreme levels of electrical power. 
Welsh/English border by 2040.
North West North West,  West Midlands
Ellesmere Port plant  Greater Manchester Public Sector Decarbonisation 
transforming to build electric  People Powered Retrofit  Scheme £2 million from the 
vans £100 million from  £1 million from the UK  UK Government to Windsor 
Stellantis to build electric vans,  Government to support initial  Academy Trust for heat 
safeguarding 1,000 jobs. business development, leading  decarbonisation and energy 
efficiency measures across 
to 1,150 homes retrofitted and 
seven schools.
3,500 local contractors retrained 
over the next five years.
South West & East  South West, Somerset
of England Hinkley Point C Nuclear Power 
£84.6 million invested by  Station) £3.5 billion already 
government and industry in  spent with companies in the 
3 ambitious aerospace R&D  South West and 12,786 jobs 
projects based in Bedford, Bristol  created so far, including 787 
and Cranfield to help the industry  apprentices.
build back greener.  Key
  Low Carbon   Public Transport
  Heat Pumps   Heat Networks
  Hydrogen   and Cycling
  Heat Pumps   Heat Networks   Low Carbon       Public    
  Hydrogen   Transport   UK-wide   CCUS   Retrofit   Electricity   Onshore Wind
  CCUS   Retrofit   and Cycling   Networks
  Electricity    
  Offshore Wind   Nuclear   Networks   Onshore Wind
  Offshore Wind   Nuclear   Green Finance   Solar
  Automotive   Aerospace   Green Finance   Solar
  Rail   Forestry   Maritime   Tidal   Automotive   Aerospace   Maritime   Tidal
  Waste and       Oil and Gas   Agriculture   Smart Systems
  Circular       Rail   Forestry   Agriculture   Smart Systems
  Economy   Science and       Steel   Nature    
  Innovation   Conservation  
  Climate Change       & Restoration   Waste and Circular    Oil and Gas   Steel   Nature Conservation
  Adaptation  
  Economy   & Restoration
46 46   Science and 
  Climate Change    Innovation
  Adaptation
Key
  Low Carbon   Public Transport
  Heat Pumps   Heat Networks
  Hydrogen   and Cycling
  CCUS   Retrofit   Electricity   Onshore Wind
  Networks
  Offshore Wind   Nuclear   Green Finance   Solar
  Automotive   Aerospace   Maritime   Tidal
  Rail   Forestry   Agriculture   Smart Systems
  Waste and Circular    Oil and Gas   Steel   Nature Conservation
  Economy   & Restoration
  Science and 
  Climate Change    Innovation
  AdaptationChapter 1 – Why Net Zero
North East, Teesside North East
Whitetail Clean Energy  Gateshead District Energy 
8 Rivers Capital and Sembcorp  Scheme £5.9 million of UK 
Energy UK’s 300MW NET power  government funding for heat 
plant, creating over  network project with mine water 
2000 construction and  source heat pump connecting 
200 operational jobs. 5 buildings and up to 1,250 new 
homes to the Gateshead District 
North East Energy Scheme.
Transforming automotive 
manufacturing  
£1 billion announced by Nissan 
and Envision AESC to create an 
electric vehicle manufacturing 
hub supporting 6,200 jobs. 
Yorkshire and  Yorkshire and 
the Humber the Humber
Able Marine Energy Park  Siemens Gamesa offshore 
Up to £75 million from the  wind factory expansion 
UK Government to facilitate  £186 million from Siemens 
a c.£500 million offshore  Gamesa to expand their offshore 
wind manufacturing port hub,  wind turbine blade factory, 
supporting up to 3,000  creating and safeguarding up to 
local jobs.  1,080 local jobs. 
East Midlands East of England 
Tackling Climate Change on  Advanced Greenhouses 
the River Rase £200,000 from  £120million from Greencoat 
the UK Government for nature- Capital backed by UK pension 
based solutions in the River  funds to build 2 greenhouses 
Rase catchment helping climate  (covering 72 acres) warmed by 
adaptation.  heat pumps utilising warm waste 
water, creating 360 new green 
jobs and 120 seasonal jobs.
Key
  Low Carbon   Public Transport
  Heat Pumps   Heat Networks
  Hydrogen   and Cycling
Midlands, Coventry
  Electricity
  CCUS   Retrofit   Onshore Wind
  Networks Coventry will be the first zero emission bus town awarded ten 
of millions to replace the entire local operator bus fleet with 
  Offshore Wind   Nuclear   Green Finance   elSecotrlica bruses. 
  Automotive   Aerospace   Maritime   Tidal
  Rail   Forestry   Agriculture   Smart Systems
  Waste and Circular    Oil and Gas   Steel   Nature Conservation
  Economy   & Restoration
  Science and  47
  Climate Change    Innovation
  AdaptationNet Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Case Study: North East of England 
This region is leading the way in championing  Nissan and Envision AESC have reaffirmed 
new technologies, whether it is electric  their belief in the region and in Britain’s 
vehicles (EVs), carbon capture, hydrogen,  plans to shift to EVs, through their £1 billion 
or renewables. Research undertaken for  flagship investment to establish an Electric 
government indicates that the North East  Vehicle Hub in Sunderland. The hub will bring 
could gain an extra 27,000 jobs by 2050  together electric vehicles, renewable energy, 
arising from UK climate action.14 The research  and battery production. Nissan will invest up 
indicates that the gains to the region over  to £423 million to produce a new-generation 
time come to a large extent from specific  all-electric vehicle in the UK. Envision AESC 
investments needed for the UK to meet net  will invest £450 million to build the UK’s first 
zero, rather than baseline economic growth.  large-scale Gigafactory.
In depth interviews with regional and industry 
stakeholders has also revealed a real and 
justified optimism about the region’s potential 
to level up due to the Green Industrial 
Revolution and remain an attractive location 
for people to live and work.
The optimism is backed by significant 
investments in offshore wind and EV 
manufacturing. Spurred on by our 40 GW 
offshore wind deployment plans and 
£160 million investment in ports and 
manufacturing, we have seen almost 
£1.5 billion in investment in our offshore 
wind manufacturing capabilities. Recently 
announced projects include GE Renewable 
Energy's plans for a new blade factory in 
Teesside, South Korea’s SeAH Wind, and 
GRI Renewable Industries’ construction of 
factories in the Humber and Smulders 
(Newcastle), and the expansion 
of Siemens Gamesa's existing 
site in Hull.15 Combined these 
projects will support up to 3,600, 
direct green jobs. 
48Chapter 1 – Why Net Zero
Leveraging private investment  and innovators to mobilise the private 
investment required to deliver net zero. 
19. We estimate that additional capital 
investment must grow from present levels to  22. Government has an important role to 
an average of £50-60 billion per year through  play in ensuring a comprehensive financing 
the late 2020s and 2030s. Most of this  offer, long-term investment signalling and 
investment will come from the private sector,  fit-for-purpose business models coupled 
providing new opportunities for businesses  with investment from numerous private 
and investors. Over the same period, we could  sources. We will work to create an attractive 
see additional resource savings of around  environment to secure the right investment in 
£180 billion as a result of our reduced use of  UK projects, with benefits to UK business and 
oil and natural gas.  communities. By building on our strengths, 
including potential for rapid scale up across 
20. The policies and spending brought 
the domestic value chain, and coupling this 
forward in the Net Zero Strategy mean that 
with a strategic approach from government on 
since the Ten Point Plan, HMG has mobilised 
policy and investment, we can create the right 
£26 billion of government capital investment 
conditions to unlock the significant scale of 
for the green industrial revolution. Along with 
private investment that will be needed. 
regulations, this will support up to 190,000 
jobs in 2025, and up to 440,000 jobs in  23. Recent steps include establishing a 
2030, and leverage up to £90 billion of private  new Office for Investment (OFI), which will 
investment by 2030. support high value investment opportunities 
into the UK which align with key government 
21. Development of existing clean energy 
priorities. The new UK Infrastructure Bank 
industries can give a sense of the scale of 
will provide leadership to the market in the 
investment we will likely need to develop and 
development of new technologies, particularly 
grow new low carbon sectors. According 
in the scaling early-stage technologies that 
to Wind Europe16, from 2010-20 the UK 
have moved through the R&D phase. With an 
leveraged around £47 billion in our world 
initial £12 billion of investment the Bank will 
leading offshore wind industry, almost half 
crowd in private investment to accelerate our 
of all European investment in the sector. As 
progress to net zero whilst helping to level up 
existing strengths expand and newer strengths 
across the UK. (See Green Investment chapter 
emerge, we will work with industry, investors, 
for more detail).
49Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Creating wider benefits for society,  ü  Supporting biodiversity by planting 
the economy and the environment  woodlands and restoring peatlands.
ü  Physical and mental health benefits, and 
24. Acting on climate change also brings 
better connectivity to jobs, public services, 
the opportunity for wider benefits for our 
and each other, by promoting more 
society individual wellbeing,17 economy, and 
walking and cycling, and improving access 
environment from improving public health to 
to green spaces.
protecting biodiversity. These include:
25. We know central government cannot and 
ü  Cleaner air and less noise pollution, by 
should not deliver these benefits by acting 
replacing fossil fuels with renewables 
alone. We want to work in partnership with 
for generating electricity and moving to 
people and communities across the country. 
electric vehicles.
To do so, we will empower local leaders to 
ü  Better insulated homes will reduce energy  kickstart their own net zero initiatives, taking 
consumption and lower bills, alongside  responsibility for improving their areas and 
health benefits. shaping their own futures.
ü  Opportunities to tackle mitigation and 
adaptation together, and bring wider 
benefits. For example, sustainable land 
management can reduce emissions from 
land, assist adaptation, improve food 
security, and protect wildlife.18 
UK framework for ending our domestic contribution to 
climate change
26. The UK has long been a global leader in  28. In 2020, we communicated to the UN 
tackling climate change. The 2008 Climate  Framework Convention on Climate Change 
Change Act sets the legal framework for  (UNFCCC) our NDC pledge to reduce UK 
reducing emissions across the UK economy.  emissions by at least 68% by 2030 on 
In 2019, we became the first major economy  1990 levels.19,20
to legislate to reach net zero by 2050.
29. In June 2021, the Government set in 
27. On our pathway to net zero, the UK has  law the sixth carbon budget (CB6) limiting 
interim targets called carbon budgets and  the volume of greenhouse gases emitted 
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs).  from 2033 to 2037. CB6 reduces emissions 
Carbon budgets restrict the total amount  by approximately 78% by 2035 compared 
of greenhouse gases that the UK can emit  to 1990 levels. For the first time, this carbon 
over five-year periods, ensuring continued  budget formally incorporates the UK’s share of 
progress towards our long-term climate target.  international aviation and shipping emissions, 
NDCs are commitments made by Parties  enabling these emissions to be accounted 
to the Paris Agreement. They show how  for consistently with other emissions and 
Parties intend to reduce their greenhouse gas  demonstrating leadership in how we account 
emissions to meet the temperature goal of the  for our emissions.21
Paris Agreement. 
50Chapter 1 – Why Net Zero
30. This strategy sets out the action we will 
take to keep us on track for the UK’s carbon 
budgets and 2030 NDC, and establishes our 
longer-term pathway towards net zero by 
2050. The Net Zero Strategy will be submitted 
to the UNFCCC as our second Long-Term 
Low Greenhouse Gas Emission Development 
Strategy under the Paris Agreement.
51Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Emission reduction targets 
in Scotland, Wales, and 
Northern Ireland
The UK Government’s net zero  Wales
target covers the whole of the UK. 
In March 2021, the Senedd passed a suite 
All parts of the UK have an integral 
of regulations to set a Net Zero Wales 2050 
role to play in delivering the UK- target, increase Wales decadal emissions 
wide carbon budgets on the path  targets, and set Wales Carbon Budgets 2 and 
to net zero by 2050. Each nation  3 in line with them. Relative to the baseline 
established in legislation, the targets and 
faces different challenges based 
budgets set in law are: 
on the share of its emissions from 
hard-to-treat sectors. For example,  •  Carbon Budget 2 (2021-25): 37% average 
Northern Ireland has a higher  reduction with a 0% offset limit 
proportion of its total emissions from  •  Carbon Budget 3 (2026-30): 58% 
average reduction 
agriculture (29%), compared to the 
UK overall (11%).22  •  2030: 63% reduction 
•  2040: 89% reduction 
Scotland
•  2050: at least 100% reduction (net zero) 
The Climate Change (Emissions Reduction 
Welsh legislation requires Welsh Government 
Targets) (Scotland) Act 2019, which amends 
Ministers to publish a plan for meeting each 
the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009, sets 
of its carbon budgets. Net Zero Wales will 
targets to reduce Scotland’s emissions of all 
be published before COP26 and will set out 
greenhouse gases to net zero by 2045 at the 
the policies and proposals to meet Wales 
latest, with interim targets for reductions of 
Carbon Budget 2 (2021-25) and set Wales on 
75% by 2030 and 90% by 2040 and annual 
a longer-term pathway to net zero. 
targets for other years. Scotland's net zero 
target is in line with the independent, expert 
advice of the Climate Change Committee.
The update to the Scottish Government’s 
2018-2032 Climate Change Plan sets out 
the pathway to its new and ambitious targets 
set by the Climate Change Act 2019. It 
is also a key strategic document for its green 
recovery from COVID-19.
52Chapter 1 – Why Net Zero
Northern Ireland
The current legislative framework for tackling 
climate change in Northern Ireland is the 
UK Climate Change Act 2008. Although this 
extends to Northern Ireland, it does not set a 
specific greenhouse gas emissions reduction 
target for Northern Ireland. It is implicit, 
and based on independent advice of the 
Climate Change Committee, that Northern 
Ireland contributes its fair share of required 
greenhouse gas emission reductions to meet 
the UK-wide net zero by 2050 target and the 
UK Government’s 5-yearly carbon budgets set 
under the UK Climate Change Act. A Climate 
Change Act for Northern Ireland, whilst not 
yet introduced, is currently being progressed 
and remains a priority for delivery during the 
current Assembly mandate, by March 2022.
The Northern Ireland Executive is also 
currently developing a multi-decade Green 
Growth Strategy. This longer-term Strategy 
will be delivered through a series of Climate 
Action Plans, which will set out the actions 
to meet sector-specific greenhouse gas 
emission targets.
53Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Leading the world to a greener, more sustainable future 
31. The UK accounts for less than 1% of  34. The four goals for the UK’s COP26 
global emissions.23 It is essential to enhance  Presidency are:
international collaboration with other countries 
a.  Mitigation: bring parties together to 
and take urgent, concrete action globally to 
deliver commitments on mitigation. 
reduce emissions in the near-term. The 2020s 
All countries should come forward with 
is a critical decade in determining whether the 
ambitious 2030 climate plans (Nationally 
Paris temperature goals can be kept within 
Determined Contributions, or NDCs) and 
reach. The UK’s role in international climate 
long-term strategies to reach net zero 
action is set out in the International Climate 
greenhouse gas emissions, with the aim of 
Leadership and Collaboration chapter.
keeping the goal of limiting global warming 
32. The UK is leading the way in global  to 1.5℃ in reach. 
climate action. Countries that are covered by 
b.  Adaptation: establish a new consensus 
a commitment to net zero or carbon neutrality 
on protecting people and nature from 
now account for around 75% of global GHG 
climate change impacts. All countries 
emissions, and around 80% of global GDP. 
should come forward with ambitious 
When the UK took the role of incoming COP 
adaptation plans and communications to 
Presidency in December 2019, coverage 
help their societies and economies adapt 
was less than 30% of world GDP. We have a 
to climate change.
unique opportunity to further this leadership 
c.  Finance: To deliver on our first two goals, 
through our G7 Presidency in 2021, and 
developed countries must deliver on their 
as the host and president of the COP26 
promise to mobilise at least $100 billion 
summit, in partnership with Italy. The COP26 
in climate finance per year by 2020, and 
summit will bring together nearly 200 Parties 
through to 2025, to help developing 
to accelerate action towards the goals of the 
countries tackle and adapt to climate 
Paris Agreement and the UNFCCC, and our 
change. International financial institutions 
drive towards global net zero. 
must play their part and we need work 
33. COP26 will be the forum to define the  towards unleashing the trillions in private 
decisive decade of climate action and setting  and public sector finance required to 
the path to global net zero emissions. The UK  secure global net zero.
is urging all parties to demonstrate how they 
d.  Collaboration: bring countries together 
will reach net zero greenhouse gas emissions 
to reach an outcome accelerating 
through near term 2030 NDC targets and 
climate action and finalising the Paris 
Long-Term Strategies to 2050, protect people 
Rulebook. Use the power of a fair 
and nature from climate change impacts, 
and inclusive Presidency to enhance 
fund climate action, and work together to 
international collaboration among policy 
deliver immediate steps to keep warming 
makers, investors, business, young 
within 1.5℃. There will also be a renewed 
people, indigenous peoples, and civil 
focus on accelerating near-term action in 
society. This can help to solve key 
the top priority areas of coal phase out, 
challenges and accelerate the delivery of 
zero-emission vehicles, climate finance, and 
the Paris Agreement goals, particularly: 
halting deforestation.
adaptation and resilience, nature, clean 
energy and transport, and finance.
54Chapter 1 – Why Net Zero
35. In delivering net zero, the UK also  36. As the world economy moves to meet the 
has the opportunity to be at the forefront  Paris commitments, with over 80% of world 
of large, expanding global markets and  GDP now committed to net zero, the UK 
capitalise on export opportunities in low  will set a clear direction and give businesses 
carbon technologies and services. This  the certainty they need to invest, grow, and 
includes renewables, CCUS, hydrogen, smart  develop the technologies of the future. Some 
energy systems and storage, Greenhouse  commentators estimate global investment 
Gas Removals (GGRs), Advanced Modular  in energy supply and infrastructure to reach 
Reactors (AMRs), and transport. By leading  $92 trillion and $173 trillion over the next 
the world in the transition to a net zero  thirty years. To achieve this level, the global 
future, the UK will be well placed to benefit  economy will need to more than double 
economically by leading in the export of  annual investments from around $1.7 trillion 
sustainable technologies and solutions.  per year to between $3.1 and $5.8 trillion per 
year on average.24 
37. This strategy sets out our approach to 
reaching net zero emissions and securing 
the vast wider benefits as we transition to a 
greener, more sustainable future. We urge 
other countries to follow this example with 
ambitious commitments at COP26 and 
detailed plans to deliver on them.
55Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Endnotes
1  IPCC (2018), ‘Global warming of 1.5°C’, https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/download/  
2  IPCC (2021), ‘Sixth Assessment Report’, https://www.ipcc.ch/assessment-report/ar6/
3  BEIS (2021), ‘Climate change and net zero: public awareness and perceptions’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/climate-change-and-net-zero-public-awareness-and-
perceptions  
4  OBR (2021), ‘Fiscal Risk Report – July 2021’, https://obr.uk/frr/fiscal-risks-report-july-2021/
5  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group 1 contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report’, https://www.
ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#FullReport 
6  Note, emissions figures exclude IAS. UNFCCC, ‘GHG emissions with LULUCF’, https://
di.unfccc.int/time_series  
7  GDP, PPP (constant 2017 international $), World Bank https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
NY.GDP.MKTP.PP.KD
8  ONS (2021), ‘Low Carbon and Renewable Energy Economy (LCREE) Survey direct and  
indirect estimates of employment, UK, 2014 to 2019’, https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/ 
environmentalaccounts/adhocs/13181lowcarbonandrenewableenergyeconomylcreesurvey  
directandindirectestimatesofemploymentuk2014to2019; 
ONS (2021), ‘Low carbon and renewable energy economy UK:2019’, https://www.ons.gov.uk/
releases/lowcarbonandrenewableenergyeconomyuk2019
9  Emissions data excludes IAS emissions. World Bank, https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/
NY.GDP.MKTP.PP.KD UNFCCC, BEIS Greenhouse Gas Inventory, ‘Final UK greenhouse gas 
emission national statistics: 1990 to 2019’, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-
greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-to-2019; National Inventory Submissions
10  BEIS (2019), ‘Energy Innovation Needs Assessment’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/energy-innovation-needs-assessments, 38
11  The UK has a comparative advantage in a product or activity if it can produce it at a lower 
opportunity cost than its competitors. The principle implies that the UK should focus on 
production of those high-value goods, services and innovative activities where it is most 
competitive. It can then trade these for other goods and services where other countries have a 
comparative advantage over the UK. Consumers and producers in the UK and trading partners 
enjoy the efficiency gains from each country specialising and trading.
12  ONS (2021), ‘Low carbon and renewable energy economy, UK:2019’, https://www.ons.gov.uk/
economy/environmentalaccounts/bulletins/finalestimates/2019 
13  LSE Grantham Institute (2021), Green economy: how the transition to net-zero could affect UK 
jobs across the country. https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/news/green-economy-how-
the-transition-to-net-zero-could-affect-uk-jobs-across-the-country/
14  BEIS (2021) Net zero in the North East: Regional transition impacts, research commissioned for 
BEIS
56Chapter 1 – Why Net Zero
15  BEIS (2021), ‘Second wind for the Humber, Teesside and UK energy industry’, [Press release], 
https://www.gov.uk/government/news/second-wind-for-the-humber-teeside-and-uk-energy-
industry 
16  Wind Europe (2021), ‘Offshore Wind in Europe, Key Trends and Statistics 2020’, exchange 
rate based on monthly average between Jan 2011 and Dec 2020, https://windeurope.org/
intelligence-platform/product/offshore-wind-in-europe-key-trends-and-statistics-2020/
17  HM Treasury (2021), ‘Green Book supplementary guidance: wellbeing’, https://assets.
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1005388/
Wellbeing_guidance_for_appraisal_-_supplementary_Green_Book_guidance.pdf 
18  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group 1 contribution to the Sixth Assessment Report’, https://www.
ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#FullReport  
19  BEIS (2020), ‘The UK’s Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-uks-nationally-determined-contribution-
communication-to-the-unfccc  
20  The UK NDC is based on territorial emissions – greenhouse gases emitted from sources within 
the UK – so does not include emissions from international aviation and shipping. This is in 
line with international reporting requirements, international expectations, and advice from the 
Climate Change Committee.
21  CCC (2020), ‘Sixth Carbon Budget’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/sixth-carbon-
budget/ 
22  BEIS analysis (2021), Greenhouse Gas Inventories for England, Scotland, Wales & Northern 
Ireland: 1990-2019 using AR5 with climate feedback Global Warming Potentials https://uk-air.
defra.gov.uk/reports/cat09/2106240841_DA_GHGI_1990-2019_Final_Issue1.2.xlsx 
23  PBL (2020), Trends in Global CO2 and Total Greenhouse Gas Emissions; 2020 Report, https://
www.pbl.nl/en/publications/trends-in-global-co2-and-total-greenhouse-gas-emissions-2020-
report
24  BloombergNEF (2021), ‘New Energy Outlook 2021’, https://about.bnef.com/new-energy-
outlook/ 
57Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
The Journey 
to Net Zero
2
Chapter59Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
1. Transforming the UK’s economy over the  2. The policies to drive these changes, 
next three decades to reach net zero will  and the opportunities arising for individuals 
be a journey of unprecedented opportunity  and the UK economy, are set out across 
and change. Our greenhouse gas emissions  the remaining chapters of this Strategy. 
have fallen by more than two-fifths in the last  This chapter first explores what reaching 
thirty years, with particular progress in the  net zero by 2050 could mean for the UK; 
decarbonisation of our electricity system,  potential scenarios of how we will get there; 
but we need to go further and faster in the  and an indicative pathway to deliver on our 
next thirty years, right across the economy.1  ambitious carbon budgets along the way, 
It will mean developing and rolling out new,  while navigating the inherent uncertainty. We 
innovative, and climate resilient technologies;  look at this journey from a whole-economy 
embracing new ways of doing things –  perspective, considering the key interactions 
from new ways of travelling, heating our  between sectors, technologies and the 
homes, and using our land; and creating  energy system that need to be planned for as 
new industries and jobs through our green  we decarbonise.
industrial revolution.
60Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
The UK’s Net Zero Future
  Our industrial heartlands are    Our journeys are made in 
reinvigorated, with innovation  zero emission vehicles, with 
and private investment in  trains, ships and planes 
clean technologies – such  running on new low carbon 
as wind, carbon capture and  energy sources. 
hydrogen in multiple locations 
across the UK including the 
  Our towns and cities have 
North East; or the manufacture 
cleaner air for everyone, and 
of batteries and electric vehicles 
support walking and cycling 
in the Midlands.
with benefits for health.
  Our green economy 
  Our goods are designed to last 
and its supply chains 
longer and be more efficient, 
provide sustainable jobs for 
while being used, repaired 
highly-skilled workers – in 
and remanufactured within a 
construction, manufacturing, 
circular economy.
engineering, science, nature 
conservation, finance and 
more, across the economy and 
  Our natural environment is 
the UK, including in rural areas.
protected, enhanced, and 
more diverse, with healthy 
ecosystems and increased 
  Our businesses are delivering 
biodiversity, supporting a 
the latest low carbon 
sustainable rural economy 
technologies, services and 
and providing wider benefits, 
innovations for the UK and 
including improved mental 
export markets; and are more 
health and protection from risks 
resilient to the global net zero 
like flooding and overheating.
transition.
  Our homes are warm and 
comfortable, powered 
and heated by clean, 
affordable energy.
61Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
A systems approach to the net zero journey
3. The characteristics of the net zero  5. We have implemented several key elements 
challenge – requiring action by multiple  of a systems approach, including: 
parties across the public and private sectors, 
•  Establishing forums for delivering shared 
delivery at pace, and management of large 
net zero goals and identifying key issues 
uncertainties – underline the need for strong 
through cross-system governance 
coordination in policy development and clear 
structures, including two new Cabinet 
signalling to markets. Government taking 
committees; 
a systems approach to policy will help to 
navigate this complexity. We must consider  •  Working towards a shared understanding 
the environment, society, and economy as  of interdependencies and risks across 
parts of an interconnected system, where  different parts of the net zero challenge, for 
changes to one area can directly or indirectly  example through £2 million funding from 
impact others. This will help to ensure we  the Shared Outcomes Fund to develop 
design policy to maximise benefits, account  systems tools;
for dependencies, mitigate conflicting interests  •  Testing and determining feasible net zero 
and take account of learning as we go. It  scenarios with our whole energy systems 
reduces the risk of unintended consequences,  modelling suite, and supporting our work 
ensuring individual decisions designed to help  to identify high leverage, systemic actions 
achieve net zero do not end up hindering it or  such as CCUS that will be necessary in a 
other important objectives. wide range of scenarios.
4. A systems approach does not attempt  6. Work will continue to develop this approach 
to design a ‘perfect’ net zero end-state  further. This Strategy encompasses changes 
thirty years into the future. It aims to enable  from across the system that will need to be 
innovative and desirable solutions to be  delivered to achieve net zero. 
developed, and to ensure that decisions 
7. As summarised in Figure 3 below, each 
are made when needed, based on the best 
sector of the economy will play a vital role 
evidence available at that time and with 
in the future net zero system, and these are 
the fullest possible range of considerations 
highly connected – changes in one area can 
brought to bear. This includes taking a 
directly or indirectly impact others.
dynamic approach to policymaking and 
updating our assumptions on an ongoing 
8. Applying a systems approach to 
basis; considering public reactions to a policy; 
policymaking can help to address complex 
accounting for where a particular investment 
policy challenges, including to identify 
or technology deployment may affect another 
interdependencies. The case study below for 
sector’s decarbonisation; and considering the 
electric vehicles demonstrates the need to 
net costs and benefits across different parts of 
understand the complex interactions which 
the economy and environment.
drive change. Government will continue to 
test and update its understanding of systems 
and how they relate to one another, which 
forms an important part of how we will monitor 
delivery, explored further in the Embedding net 
zero in government chapter. 
6263Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Figure 3: The role of each sector in the 
future net zero system
 Power
Role of sector: generates electricity to meet 
low carbon energy demand across all sectors.
 Natural Resources & Waste
Relationship with other sectors: depends 
Role of sector: land provides both  on demand across end use sectors, while 
energy sources and natural carbon  specific forms of generation can use carbon 
sinks, while polluting areas, including  capture technology, hydrogen, and waste.
agriculture and the treatment of waste, 
must decarbonise.
Relationship with other sectors: 
depends on developing new ways of 
using land sustainably, while end uses 
like agricultural machinery will rely on 
low carbon energy.
 Greenhouse Gas Removals  Industry
Role of sector: alongside natural  Role of sector: develops cleaner ways to 
carbon sinks, engineered removals  produce the wide range of products we all 
deliver negative emissions, either  rely on, from food and drink to iron and steel.
directly from the air or as a co-
Relationship with other sectors: depends 
benefit of methods to generate 
on low carbon energy supply from power 
power, fuels and products.
and hydrogen, as well as the use of carbon 
capture technology alongside power, 
Relationship with other 
sectors: compensates any  hydrogen and greenhouse gas removals.
residual emissions to ensure a 
net zero system. Engineered 
removals also use electricity.
64Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
 Heat & Buildings
Role of sector: our public, business, industrial and 
residential buildings, as well as products we use for 
cooking and everyday living, move to green forms of 
energy.
Relationship with other sectors: depends on low 
carbon energy, while different heat options will in 
turn affect the development of supply sectors.
 Transport
Role of sector: all forms of travel that keep modern 
society moving – road, rail, aviation, and shipping – 
run on green forms of energy.
Relationship with other sectors: depends on 
low carbon energy, while different transport options 
will in turn impact the development of supply sectors.
 Fuel Supply & Hydrogen
Role of sector: supports energy supply, 
especially in areas that are harder to 
electrify such as heavier transport. Oil and 
gas play a far reduced role where needed 
and abated by carbon capture technology 
where possible.
Relationship with other sectors: 
depends on demand across end use 
sectors, while different types of hydrogen 
production use electricity, carbon capture, 
and biomass.
65Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Case study of a ‘systems 
approach’: Electric Vehicle 
(EV) roll out 
The transition to EVs is central to  The roll out of EVs will have an impact on 
decarbonising road transport. Higher sales  demand for petrol and diesel, with potential 
of EVs means overall electricity demand  to impact through the supply chain, from 
will increase, requiring greater electricity  production to processing, distribution and 
generation and grid capacity. Over the lifetime  retail. Uptake will also have an impact on 
of an EV, overall carbon emissions are already  R&D, investment, and manufacturing of both 
significantly lower than a traditional internal  EVs, and the infrastructure required to use 
combustion engine car and, as the electricity  them. The effect of investment in these areas 
grid continues to decarbonise, the lifetime  would be wider availability of the infrastructure 
of emissions from driving an EV reduce. The  required for charging, reduction in the cost of 
transition to EVs therefore has a potential  manufacturing, and further advances in EV 
knock-on impact on the industrial sector and  technology.
its wider supply chains, particularly in certain 
Manufacturing costs will likely fall as 
regions of the UK, for example creating 
production increases at scale and investment 
additional demand for new wind turbine 
in R&D will bring down the costs of 
manufacture and installation.
components. Wider availability of reliable 
More EVs will affect both the scale and  charging infrastructure should remove range 
nature of electricity demand, including the  anxiety for EV drivers and streamlining 
timing and scale of peaks, as patterns of  payment methods should improve the 
charging behaviour develop (e.g. many people  consumer experience. These two factors 
choosing to charge at the end of the working  will then encourage further take up of EVs 
day). The changes this could bring need to be  with these sets of relationships representing 
carefully thought through, and opportunities  positive feedback loops. 
seized. For example, innovative technology 
The examples above are a significant 
could support smoothing of electricity 
simplification of some of the interactions 
demand, by allowing electricity stored in 
between sectors as EV roll out progresses. 
batteries to be fed back into the grid 
The below systems map shows a more 
at times of low renewable generation 
granular picture, though this is also a 
or high demand (vehicle-to-grid 
simplification and some variables will have 
technology). Smart charging (enabled 
other influences that are not displayed here.
by regulations that Government plans 
to lay later this year) will also help 
to move demand away from peak 
times as well as helping consumers 
to benefit from lower cost off-peak 
electricity. 
66Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
Figure 4: Example of a ‘systems map’ showing some interactions to consider 
in the roll out of electric vehicles 
67Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Pathways to net zero by 2050
Key features of the net zero  green sectors, reducing air pollution with 
benefits for health, and enhancing biodiversity. 
transition
We also expect costs to continue to fall 
9. There are a range of ways in which net zero  as green technology advances, industries 
could be achieved in the UK. Our exact route  decarbonise, and private sector investment 
will depend on the availability and deployment  grows. Recent cost benefit analysis for the 
of key technologies, supported by long-term  sixth carbon budget4 suggests that the 
market growth, as well as the extent to which  significant benefits of net zero more than offset 
individuals and businesses adopt green  the costs, resulting in a net benefit.
choices. Our approach must consider physical 
12. Most costs are the additional capital 
factors, such as land availability and climate 
costs (and associated financing) of low carbon 
change risks like drought and flooding. As a 
technologies, although significant fuel savings 
principle, we will pursue options that leave 
help to offset these. We estimate that the 
the environment in a better state for the next 
net cost, excluding air quality and emissions 
generation by improving biodiversity, air quality, 
savings benefits, will be equivalent to 1-2% of 
water quality, natural capital, and resilience to 
GDP in 2050. Our approach will need to reflect 
climate change where appropriate.
that benefits and impacts of the transition 
10. As we increase our efforts to decarbonise  will be dependent on individual household 
domestically, we must ensure production, and  characteristics, such as their housing type and 
the associated greenhouse gas emissions,  current vehicle usage, to support those low-
does not shift to other countries with lower  income households most affected by individual 
climate obligations. In the Net Zero Review  technology transitions. The government’s 
we consider the carbon leakage risk facing  approach will also support the principle that 
UK businesses on a sectoral basis and  those who produce the pollution should bear 
discuss the approaches to help address this  the costs of managing it. Further information 
risk.2 In addition to encouraging our trading  on the economic impacts is set out in HM 
partners to increase their own efforts, we are  Treasury’s Net Zero Review, which informs 
engaging with industry to better understand  our approach to achieving a transition that 
the risks and consider the full range of options  works for households, businesses and public 
to address these, including through the UK  finances, and maximises economic growth.
Emissions Trading Scheme, discussed further 
13. The exact technology and energy mix in 
in the Industry chapter.
2050 cannot be known now, and our path to 
11. While there are significant costs in  net zero will respond to the innovation and 
reaching net zero, the cost of inaction is much  adoption of new technologies over time. We 
higher. The Office for Budget Responsibility’s  expect, however, to rely on the following key 
recent report showed unmitigated climate  green technologies and energy carriers, which 
change resulting in “debt spiralling up to  interact to meet demand across sectors and 
around 290% of GDP thanks to the cost of  to remain low carbon.
adapting to an ever hotter climate and of 
•  Electricity from low carbon generation 
more frequent and more costly economic 
and storage technologies meets higher 
shocks”.3 In addition to reducing the risks of 
demand for low carbon power in buildings, 
catastrophic climate change, net zero will also 
industry, transport, and agriculture;
bring significant benefits and opportunities, 
such as economic growth and jobs in new 
68Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
•  Hydrogen can complement the electricity  •  Biomass combined with CCUS can 
system, especially in harder to electrify  remove carbon from the atmosphere 
areas like parts of industry and heating,  and support low carbon electricity and 
and in heavier transport such as aviation  hydrogen generation. Biomass and other 
and shipping. A range of low carbon  wastes can also support low carbon fuels 
production methods could be used;5 for industry, buildings, and transport.
•  Carbon capture usage and storage 
14. These new technologies could transform 
(CCUS) can capture CO  from power 
our energy system by 2050. Electricity, low 
2
generation, hydrogen production, 
carbon hydrogen, and BECCS could all 
and industrial processes – storing it 
scale up, while reliance on fossil fuels will 
underground or using it. This technology 
drop considerably and can be combined 
also supports negative emissions from 
with carbon capture technology to abate 
engineered greenhouse gas removals – 
emissions, with any residual emissions offset 
bioenergy with carbon capture and storage 
by greenhouse gas removals.
(BECCS) and Direct Air Carbon Capture 
and Storage (DACCS);
Figure 5: 2019 energy generation and end uses6 
69Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Illustrative 2050 scenarios
15. Modelling illustrative net zero scenarios 
allows us to explore possible energy 
and technology solutions in 2050, better 
understand important system-wide 
interactions, and identify features common to 
all options. Below we show three modelled 
scenarios all reaching net zero by 2050 
through the same pace of decarbonisation, 
which demonstrate a range of practical ways 
in which net zero could feasibly be delivered 
with technology and resources known 
today.7 They do not represent ‘most likely’ or 
‘preferred’ solutions, and the actual position 
in 2050 may also vary outside of these 
scenarios. There is a great deal of uncertainty 
inherent in any modelling as far into the 
future as 2050, which is highly sensitive 
to economic, societal, and technological 
developments – see the Technical Annex for 
details of the modelling.
70Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
2050 Scenario 1: High electrification
Explores the impact of widespread electrification to support transport, heating, and 
industry decarbonisation, relative to other scenarios, with deep decarbonisation of 
electricity supply.
This pathway sees UK electricity generation increasing to around 690 TWh, more than doubling 
from today,8 and low carbon hydrogen production scaling up to 240 TWh by 2050. Sectors such 
as road transport and buildings reach near zero emissions, through widespread electrification, 
with small residual emissions possible in personal and heavy goods transport; while the majority 
of buildings use electric heating, with the remainder using connected low carbon district 
heat networks. Industry emissions are near zero, through the full suite of green technologies 
(electricity, hydrogen, and CCUS), alongside energy efficiency measures. Electricity generation is 
overwhelmingly decarbonised, through widespread deployment of renewables alongside other 
low carbon generation including nuclear power and gas with CCUS. Residual emissions remain 
in aviation, agriculture, and waste, though these reduce from today’s levels through, for example, 
sustainable aviation fuels, more efficient farm practices, and reduction in landfill waste. These 
emissions are balanced by significant afforestation, together with engineered removals (primarily 
BECCS but also DACCS).9
Figure 6: High electrification scenario: energy generation and end uses in 2050
Figure 7: High electrification scenario: residual emissions in 2050
Power
Fuel supply & Hydrogen
Industry
Heat & Buildings
Domestic transport
International aviation & shipping
Agriculture  & LULUCF 
Waste & F-gases --110000 --5500 00 5500 110000
Greenhouse Gas Removals
EEmmiissssiioonnss  iinn  MMttCCOO ee
22
71Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
2050 Scenario 2: High resource
Explores the impact of using low carbon hydrogen more extensively, particularly for 
decarbonising buildings, power, and heavy vehicles. It also assumes higher levels of tree-
planting are achievable, increasing the ‘negative emissions’ available from land-use sinks.
This pathway sees low carbon hydrogen generation increasing to around 500 TWh. As hydrogen 
is the main energy source for heating, electricity demand and therefore generation is lower than 
in scenario 1 at 610 TWh. Electricity and district heat still play a role in both residential and non-
domestic buildings but the majority of building heat demand is assumed to be met by hydrogen. 
End users of energy (e.g. transport and buildings) reach similar levels of decarbonisation as 
in scenario 1. In heavy transport, there is a shift to increased use of hydrogen. Compared to 
scenario 1, greater levels of tree planting allow for slightly higher residual emissions to remain, 
primarily in hydrogen production. Engineered removals are at a similar scale to scenario 1 to offset 
remaining residual emissions in the hardest-to-decarbonise sectors of aviation and agriculture. 
Figure 8: High resource scenario: energy generation and end uses in 2050
Figure 9: High resource scenario: residual emissions in 2050
Power
Fuel supply & Hydrogen
Industry
Heat & Buildings
Domestic transport
International aviation & shipping
Agriculture  & LULUCF 
Waste & F-gases --110000 --5500 00 5500 110000
Greenhouse Gas Removals
EEmmiissssiioonnss  iinn  MMttCCOOee
22
72Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
2050 Scenario 3: High innovation
Explores a world in which successful innovations enable lower residual emissions to be 
reached in aviation, while higher capture rates increase the impact of carbon capture 
technologies, with higher levels of DACCS deployed over the 2040s.
In scenarios 1 and 2, end users of energy such as transport, industry, and buildings are 
decarbonised extensively, while accounting for residual emissions in aviation and baseline 
assumptions on the technological potential for carbon capture. In this scenario more optimistic 
assumptions around carbon capture and aviation, such as the availability of sustainable fuels at 
scale and zero emission aircraft, cause a divergence from scenarios 1 and 2 in the deployment 
of certain technologies. With lower residual emissions in aviation and improvement in capture 
or negative emission potential, end use sectors such as transport, buildings, agriculture and 
industrial dispersed sites can decarbonise to a lesser extent. This pathway sees electricity and 
low carbon hydrogen generation requirements in between the two scenarios explored previously, 
at 670 TWh and 330 TWh respectively.
Figure 10: High innovation scenario: energy generation and end uses in 2050
Figure 11: High innovation scenario: residual emissions in 2050
Power
Fuel supply & Hydrogen
Industry
Heat & Buildings
Domestic transport
International aviation & shipping
Agriculture  & LULUCF 
Waste & F-gases --110000 --5500 00 5500 110000
Greenhouse Gas Removals
EEmmiissssiioonnss  iinn  MMttCCOO ee
22
73Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Insights from potential 2050 outcomes for net zero journey
16. Despite the uncertainties, we can draw  •  Both electricity and hydrogen demand 
some broad conclusions from the illustrative  grow significantly from today, and need 
scenarios above to help shape our approach  to be produced with very low levels 
to net zero: of emissions by 2050. Biomass also 
becomes a key energy carrier to enable 
•  Extensive decarbonisation is required 
engineered removals and support low 
across transport, buildings, and industry, 
carbon fuel production;
given the need to account for possible 
•  Given the need to plan for some residual 
residual emissions in agriculture, aviation, 
emissions, it is appropriate to plan for use 
waste, and heavy industry and possible 
of greenhouse gas removals. The carbon 
limitations on deployment of greenhouse 
capture processes needed for this are 
gas removals;
likely to play a significant role in wider 
•  Given this, extensive energy efficiency 
decarbonisation, for example in power;
measures across these sectors are likely 
•  Primary energy sources increase in 
to be beneficial to bring down energy 
number and diversify, including a range 
demand and cost across the system. 
of renewables, and from biomass 
Every scenario sees overall energy demand 
and waste. This diversified system 
from end use sectors reduce substantially;
for energy generation also becomes 
•  Different technologies for these sectors 
more interdependent to ensure 
can be accommodated (for example, 
security of supply.
predominantly electric heat pumps or 
hydrogen for heating), meaning wide 
ranges of possible electricity and hydrogen 
demand remain plausible; 
Indicative delivery pathway to 2037
An indicative pathway meeting our  and must respond flexibly to changes that 
arise over time.
emissions targets up to Carbon 
Budget 6 18. The pathway is based on our 
understanding now of the potential for each 
17. Drawing on the insights from our 
sector to reduce emissions up to 2037, 
illustrative 2050 scenarios, we have developed 
considering the balance between sectors that 
a delivery pathway: an indicative trajectory of 
is optimal for the entire economy in terms 
emissions reductions which meets our targets 
of delivery and cost. Emission reductions 
up to the sixth carbon budget ending in 2037. 
beyond our existing policies combine evidence 
This is broadly consistent with all three 2050 
on theoretical potential for abatement with 
scenarios and follows decarbonisation that 
judgements about barriers to delivery, the rate 
we aim to achieve through this Strategy. The 
at which low carbon options could be adopted 
uncertainties inherent in our 2050 scenarios 
in practice and timescales for key decisions. 
also apply to our 2037 delivery pathway. It is 
We take an economy-wide view, including to 
designed only to provide an indicative basis 
balance end use sector demands with supply 
on which to make policy and plan to deliver 
side considerations, such as infrastructure and 
on our whole-economy emissions targets. 
the operation of the electricity and other fuel 
The exact path we take is likely to differ 
supply sectors.
74Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
19. As a general principle, our indicative  range of options presented in the illustrative 
pathway to 2037 prioritises emissions  2050 scenarios open. The Embedding Net 
reductions where known technologies and  Zero in Government chapter sets out how 
solutions exist and thereby minimises reliance  Government will monitor progress to ensure 
on the use of greenhouse gas removals  we stay on track for our emissions targets 
to meet our targets. It is designed to drive  and respond to developments affecting our 
progress in the short-term, while creating  long-term goals.
options in a way that seeks to keep the 
75Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Figure 12: Indicative emissions reductions to meet UK carbon 
budgets and NDC10
900 4500
800 4000
700 3500
e
e 2
O2600 3000 O
C
C
t
t M
M
 
n 500 2500 et
 i g
s d
n u
o b
ssi400 CB1 2000 ar 
mi Headroom for IAS e
y
E CB2  
5
300 1500
CB3
CB4
200 1000
CB5
CB6
100 500
0 0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
2025 – 55% reduction (excluding 
international aviation and shipping emissions)
2030 – NDC target for at least 68% 
reduction (excluding international aviation 
and shipping)
2035 – 78% reduction (including international 
aviation and shipping)
2050 – 100% reduction
To meet whole-economy net zero target
76Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
Indicative sectoral decarbonisation  Given the interdependencies and interactions 
pathways within and between sectors, the exact areas 
for emissions savings may shift, as our 
20. Broken down by sector, our indicative  understanding increases. These pathways 
delivery pathway implies the reduction in  are therefore not predictions or targets: the 
emissions up to 2037. These indicative sector  emissions savings ultimately contributed by 
pathways, presented as ranges for residual  each sector are likely to differ as we respond 
emissions to reflect the inherent uncertainty,  to real-world changes.
help to drive change and to plan how we 
can remain on track to meet our targets. 
Figure 13: Indicative delivery pathway to 2037 by sector
Source: BEIS analysis
77Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
21. The pathway considers that sectors  financing, and infrastructure; and the need 
have the potential to make progress at  to overcome wider delivery barriers. These 
different rates, for example, depending on the  constraints and action to overcome them are 
availability and deployment of technological  summarised below and explored in more detail 
solutions; development of supply chains,  in subsequent chapters. 
Expected 
% of UK  reduction 
emissions  by 2035  Key features of the delivery pathway 
Sector (2019)11  from 1990 to 2037
Power 80-85% By 2035, all our electricity will need to come 
11%
from low carbon sources, subject to security of 
supply, moving to a fully decarbonised power 
system whilst meeting a 40-60% increase 
in demand. Expected residual emissions 
will be limited to CCUS plants, unabated 
gas, and energy from waste. This means 
increased investment in the grid network, 
electricity storage solutions and flexible grid 
management, to ensure decarbonisation 
without risking security of supply.
Fuel supply  53-60% Large potential from electrification of oil and 
5%
and Hydrogen gas installations and addressing venting 
and flaring in the existing fuel supply sectors 
where demand is expected to fall over time. 
Emissions savings in the incumbent fuel supply 
sector will be marginally offset by emissions 
expected from low carbon hydrogen and 
fuel production, which will enable significant 
emissions savings through fuel switching 
across a range of end use sectors. Hydrogen 
production is expected to establish in the 
2020s before a significant ramp up in the early 
2030s, using a range of production methods to 
meet demand. 
Industry 63-76% Deep decarbonisation through resource and 
15%
energy efficiency, fuel switching, and CCUS 
deployment are all required, starting with 
industrial clusters and major emitters, such as 
the steel sector. Decarbonisation of smaller 
and more dispersed sites will also be needed, 
placing demands on associated infrastructure.
78Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
Heat and  47-62% Addressing heat emissions will require a 
17%
Buildings substantial increase in the uptake of low 
carbon heating up to 2035, when all new 
installations will be net zero compatible. In 
any heat pathway, improved energy efficiency 
– through investment in buildings fabrics and 
better product standards – will reduce overall 
energy use and costs. Advanced smart meters 
will inform consumers and businesses about 
their energy use, encouraging energy-saving 
behaviour.
Transport12  47-59% Road transport is transformed through 
32%
increasing use of zero emission vehicles, 
driven in part by ending the sale of new 
petrol and diesel cars and vans by 2030 and 
supported by increasing the share of trips 
taken by cycling, walking, and public transport. 
Progress is expected to decarbonise aviation 
and shipping through efficiency improvements 
and the uptake of low carbon fuels. These will 
require international coordination.
Natural  39-51% Increased afforestation and peat restoration 
20%
Resources contribute significantly, though with long 
lead-in times. By 2035, perennial energy crop 
and short rotation forestry can contribute 
significantly to carbon sequestration, with 
potential to support power, fuel supply, 
industry, and transport through BECCS and 
generation of biofuels.
Waste emissions reduce with increased 
diversion of municipal biodegradable waste 
streams away from landfill, and potential 
savings from other parts of the sector, such 
as wastewater. Use and therefore emissions 
of F-gases continues to reduce in response to 
future control measures.
Agriculture emissions are largely from livestock 
and nutrient management. The pathway 
assumes emissions will be reduced through 
improved and innovative farming practices.
Greenhouse  Not applicable Deployment of BECCS and DACCS. Deployment 
Gas Removals  dependent on development of UK CCUS 
infrastructure and the availability of suitable, 
sustainable, and low-cost biomass feedstocks.
79Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
22. The changes we expect in sectors  2037 while overall, energy demand reduces 
will evolve over time. In some cases,  significantly through increased efficiency and 
alternative measures within a sector could  fossil fuels are replaced by new sources of 
achieve broadly the same level of emissions  energy. Electricity generation increases to 
abatement. In other cases, we will need  meet a larger share of energy demand, and 
to respond to strategic decisions that  low carbon hydrogen grows from a near zero 
government makes in the future. One of the  base to play a significant role from the 2030s. 
most significant decisions that will affect our 
24. Decisions in 2026 around hydrogen’s 
pathway will be on the balance of types of low 
role in providing heat in buildings will have 
carbon heating solutions, mainly electricity and 
a substantial impact on relative hydrogen 
hydrogen, deployed in buildings. The Heat 
and electricity demands – Figure 14 shows 
and Buildings Strategy commits to strategic 
a scenario where hydrogen is not used 
decisions on the relative roles of hydrogen 
to heat buildings, which is predominantly 
and electrification for on-grid homes by 2026 
decarbonised via electrification through heat 
and the relevant sector chapter in this strategy 
pumps. In a scenario where hydrogen has a 
explores alternative options that are consistent 
more significant role in decarbonising heat in 
with the level of ambition implied by our 
buildings, hydrogen demand would increase 
delivery pathway.
by 70 TWh by 2035 and electricity demand 
Key energy changes and deployment  would decrease by 20 TWh (due to the high 
efficiency of heat pumps more hydrogen is 
implied by the delivery pathway
required to produce the same amount of heat). 
23. Assumed energy demand in our pathway  Beyond heat, the indicative delivery pathway 
is based on government’s central assumptions  describes just one scenario for potential 
about required technology uptake, with a  hydrogen demand in industry, transport, and 
variation to reflect the outstanding strategic  power – the UK Hydrogen Strategy takes 
decision on the potential role of hydrogen  a wider view to consider greater ranges for 
to heat buildings. We expect both natural  hydrogen use in all sectors.13
gas and oil demand to more than halve by 
80Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
Figure 14: Energy demands up to 2037 assumed by delivery pathway
2,500
2,000
1,500
h
W
T
1,000
500
0
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037
Natural gas Oil Bioenergy Electricity Hydrogen
Source: BEIS analysis
Note: for illustrative purposes, this shows energy demands in a scenario in which electricity is predominantly used to 
heat buildings. See the Technical Annex for hydrogen for heat scenario.
81Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
25. Meeting the increasing demand for low  •  Carbon capture is expected to need to 
carbon energy across the economy relies  reach capacity for a total of ~20-30 MtCO
2 
on scaling up significantly, the new green  per year by the early 2030s across the 
technologies and energy carriers identified  economy – more than double what was 
above. While the deployment of these will  set out in the Ten Point Plan – and at least 
respond to changes over time, our indicative  ~50 MtCO  by the mid-2030s; 
2
pathway suggests they are central to 
•  Biomass is anticipated to need 
decarbonisation over the next 15 years:
increases in feedstock supply from the 
2020s to support BECCS deployment 
•  Electricity sees an expected 40-60% 
through various routes for use in 
increase in demand by 2035, all met 
‘hard-to-decarbonise’ areas. These 
from low carbon sources to bring forward 
resources will be explored in the 
the government’s commitment to a fully 
Biomass Strategy.
decarbonised power system by 15 years, 
subject to security of supply;
26. Figure 15 below shows some wider 
•  Hydrogen production capacity ambition  illustrative deployment of technologies 
for 5 GW by 2030, which is expected  or measures assumed in our pathway to 
to increase to around 10 or 17 GW  demonstrate a sense of the scale and pace 
by 2035 (depending on the role of  of change required. These are based on 
hydrogen for heat); modelling assumptions, which are detailed 
in the Technical Annex, and do not represent 
targets – the delivery of such measures 
will depend on, and respond to, real-
world change.
82Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
Figure 15: Illustrative examples of deployment implied by the delivery pathway 
Today  Mid 2020s  Early 2030s Mid 2030s
Zero emission cars
             
As a proportion of total 
car fleet          
1 icon = 5 % points
     
 
Low carbon homes*
               
Cumulative homes 
with low carbon                
heating
     
1 icon = 1m
     
 
Electricity 
                       
generation
Total UK generation                        
1 icon = 50 TWh
       
 
Carbon Capture
             
Total annual CO  
2
captured across           
sectors
     
1 icon = 5 MtCO
2
     
Trees
                     
Annual area of 
afforestation in UK      
1 icon = 10,000 ha
Note: For illustrative purposes, icons represent approximate and rounded figures from our modelling. Where there 
are ranges, an approximate central point has been shown.
* Homes with low carbon heating includes homes heated by heat pumps, hydrogen or connected to heat networks
83Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Essential activity driving the delivery pathway
27. It is, of course, impossible to predict every  a path which maintains flexibility in the future, 
possible path to net zero that might arise over  while ensuring we do not delay the action 
the next 30 years – we do not seek to do so.  we know is needed in the near-term. This 
New innovations may emerge, enabling the  aims to provide the certainty to drive forward 
market to move more quickly or at lower cost  investment and change, while allowing the 
than expected, while in other areas progress  market to respond to new opportunities and 
may be hindered by unexpected deployment  challenges which arise from the transition. The 
challenges as technologies are brought to  UK Emissions Trading Scheme is a crucial way 
scale. This Strategy does not attempt to  in which we ensure that our pathway is rooted 
ignore these uncertainties, but rather to plot  in cost-effective, market-led solutions.
84Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
UK Emissions Trading Scheme as a 
key driver of our path to net zero
The UK ETS, a ‘cap and trade’ scheme,  To mitigate the risk of carbon leakage, 
is a market-based pricing mechanism to  in which production and associated 
incentivise and control the reduction of  greenhouse gas emissions are offshored 
emissions in a cost-effective way. A cap is set  in ways that would not have happened if 
on the total amount of certain greenhouse  the pricing of emissions across jurisdictions 
gases that can be emitted by the sectors  was implemented in an equivalent way, we 
covered by the scheme over a given period.  currently give at risk sectors a proportion 
The cap is divided into allowances, and  of their allowances for free to reduce their 
participants receive or purchase allowances  exposure to the carbon price. We initiated a 
which they can sell and buy with one another  review of free allocation policy earlier this year 
as needed. This UK ETS cap will reduce over  with a call for evidence and plan to consult in 
time, providing a long-term market signal so  the coming months, as part of a wider review 
companies can plan and invest in abatement  into the UK ETS. This review will focus on how 
accordingly – offering new trade and export  free allocations can be better targeted in line 
opportunities. The cap is initially set 5% below  with a reduction to the overall cap, while still 
the UK’s notional share of the EU ETS cap  preserving the incentive to decarbonise.
for Phase IV of the EU ETS. We will consult 
in the coming months on an appropriate cap 
consistent with net zero.
The UK ETS acts as a cross-cutting policy 
lever to drive market-based abatement, 
incentivising industries to find the most 
cost-effective solutions to decarbonise. This 
ensures that, as industries develop lower 
carbon processes, our path to net zero adapts 
to cost-effective abatement routed in market- 
based solutions. We have committed to 
exploring expanding the UK ETS to the two 
thirds of uncovered emissions and we will 
provide a further update in due course. 
It remains important, however, that we  
develop policies which actively  
support and encourage sectors to 
decarbonise, rather than rely on  
applying an emissions cap and  
the consequent carbon pricing as  
our sole mechanism. Our delivery  
pathway provides a sound basis  
to underpin those policies to 
decarbonise, set out in the 
chapters that follow.
85Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
28. Our analysis points to the following  •  Innovation for new technologies. 
essential planks that we can be confident  Green technology, including research 
net zero will depend on. These underpin the  and development into new options, is a 
chapters that follow in this Strategy.  cornerstone of the net zero journey. As well 
as the supply-side technologies discussed 
•  Integration of low carbon energy 
above, this also means new technologies 
sources in a smart and flexible 
in end use sectors – for example, installing 
way. For example, fully decarbonising 
zero carbon heating and delivering 
our electricity system – in addition to  
zero emission surface transport, while 
renewables, nuclear, and power CCUS – 
transforming the way we use natural 
could also rely on large-scale long duration 
resources, farm our land, and manage our 
storage, as well as use of BECCS and 
waste. Different types of public and private 
hydrogen-fired generation, to manage 
support are required to develop nascent 
peaks in demand. Hydrogen could require 
technologies and deploy known ones at 
substantial electricity for production via 
scale. Government has a role to play in a 
electrolysis, but in turn could help improve 
financing offer, investment signalling, and 
the efficiency of a high-renewables 
developing business models.
electricity system by using excess supply 
•  Green investment. Private investment 
during periods of high generation and low 
will provide most of the financing needed 
demand, as well as further energy storage.
to commercialise early technologies 
•  Increasing diversity of energy sources 
and scale low carbon sectors. We need 
for end uses. The removal of unabated 
additional net zero investment to reach c. 
fossil fuels from the system which currently 
£50-60 billion/year in the late-2020s and 
supply most of the energy requirements 
2030s. However, public finance and public 
in end use sectors, such as transport and 
finance institutions will provide much of 
heating, has potential to lead to a greater 
the early investment, intervention, and 
range of technologies and energy carriers 
signalling that will create the conditions 
playing a part in future. This could create 
for an acceleration of net zero investment. 
some resilience, though there may not 
This will also generate significant financial 
always be scope for direct substitution.
savings if achieved and accompanied by 
•  Increasing energy efficiency.  effective policy, thereby lowering the cost 
The low carbon energy system depends  of capital for investment. 
on overall energy demands reducing 
•  Demand-side changes and public 
significantly. This means all demand 
engagement. The rollout of low carbon 
sectors becoming far more efficient, 
solutions relies on positive public 
through adoption of new technologies, 
reception and demand to adopt them. 
better energy management, and direct 
Consumers need to have access to 
investment in energy efficiency measures. 
the right technologies, understand their 
Such measures can be considered ‘low 
benefits, and have confidence that they 
regret’ to pursue throughout the transition 
will be protected if they use them. The 
and will, in turn, affect the level of energy 
deployment of technologies should also 
supply and carbon capture required 
respond to their reception by consumers, 
in the system. 
and go with the grain on consumer 
behaviour and trends. We also need 
our workforce to have the skills to meet 
increasing demand, including in areas such 
as housing retrofit, heat pump installation, 
electric vehicle manufacturing, charge 
86Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
point installation and forestry. More widely,  •  Sustainable use of resources. 
low carbon and environmental practices  Net zero will mean maximising the value of 
will require people and businesses to make  resources within a more efficient circular 
green choices, and government has a role  economy. It will need a significant increase 
to play in making these as easy, attractive,  in the use of certain types of resources – 
and accessible as possible. The net zero  critical minerals like lithium, graphite, and 
journey must be a joint one and will be  cobalt, as well an increased demand on 
affected by how engaged and supportive  resources like copper and steel – from 
the public are. manufacturing green technologies to 
building large-scale infrastructure. This 
•  New standards and regulation. In certain 
will require new robust supply chains 
areas government will need to support and 
and provide economic opportunities, but 
complement market-led decarbonisation 
there will be environmental trade-offs, and 
with standards and regulation to ensure 
potential negative impacts on habitats, 
that, where appropriate, green options are 
biodiversity, and water resources to be 
pursued, while high carbon options are 
managed carefully. For example, ammonia 
phased out. This will help to accelerate 
emissions from anaerobic digestion, which 
low regrets areas like energy efficiency, 
can use waste as a feedstock, can also 
such as ensuring our homes are built to 
affect biodiversity and health.
new standards, and high impact areas like 
zero emission vehicles. It will also ensure  •  Understanding land use trade-offs. 
suppliers of higher-carbon technologies  Like other resources, our land is finite and 
and fuels provide low carbon alternatives,  competition for it will need to be managed 
driving deployment at scale. as we rely on natural resources and use 
land for multiple new purposes, such as 
•  Planning and infrastructure. 
perennial energy crops and short rotation 
Low carbon solutions rely on transforming 
forestry for energy generation, while 
the infrastructure needed to deliver them. 
allowing for afforestation and peatland 
Increasing electricity generation needs to 
restoration to sequester and avoid 
be accompanied by building out a flexible 
emissions. We will also need to ensure net 
grid. Alongside dedicated hydrogen 
zero is compatible with wider uses of land 
infrastructure, new CO  transport and 
2 such as agriculture, housing, infrastructure, 
storage infrastructure is needed for the use 
and environmental goals. These land use 
of CCUS which will require investment of 
challenges are exacerbated by the impact 
around £15 billion from now to the end of 
of climate change on the availability of 
the Carbon Budget 6 period. We need to 
productive land and water in future.
ensure that low carbon energy generation 
can be connected to sources of demand 
29. These features underpin the critical 
geographically, which means improving 
activity driving decarbonisation across sectors 
knowledge of local circumstances and 
of the economy. A summary is provided 
opportunities for generation. We also 
below up to 2035, which is not exhaustive 
recognise the importance of the planning 
but focuses on the new technologies which 
system to common challenges like 
need to be developed and deployed over the 
combating climate change and supporting 
next decade. Policies and proposals to detail 
sustainable growth.
how this activity is achieved are set out in 
subsequent chapters.
87Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Full  decarbonisation of power CCUS capturing 9MtCO  2industrial emissions per year by 2035 Phase out new gas boilers in line with natural cycle so all heating by 2050 is net zero compatible 13 million low carbon homes, including 7-11 million heat pumps 35
6: high-level essential activity across sectors to 2035 Market mechanisms continue to evolve to support electricity system decarbonisation, especially from the 2030s Building out electricity infrastructure, especially in the 2020s Strategic approach to energy networks, smart technologies, and market reform to incorporate low carbon and flexible technologies efficiently 6 longer duration storage demonstrations Opening of Allocation Round 4 – UK’s largest ever renewables auction Hinkley Point C operational (EDF 40 GW offshore wind(including a minimum budget for floating offshore wind)estimate)Nuclear fusion strategySMR designs complete regulatory Decision on next steps for long duration storageapproval for UK deploymentFirst SMRs and AMR demonstrator deployedNuclear roadmap Final Investment Decision  for deploymenton Sizewell C At least 1 CCUS plant by mid-2020s Development and implementation of regulatory and market frameworks for hydrogen Increased scale and range Small scale electrolytic hydrogen productionof hydrogen production Large scale electrolytic and CCUS-enabled electrolytic hydrogen production(e.g. nuclear, biomass)                    Review barriers to electrification of oil and  gas production1GW low carbon 5GW low carbon hydrogen hydrogen production production capacitycapacity Launch Net Zero Decide on blending 10% reduction Hydrogen Fundhydrogen into gas grid in oil and gas 25% reduction in oil 50% reduction in oil production and gas production and gas production emissions emissions by 2025emissions by 2050Finalise hydrogen business model by 2025and low carbon standard Increasing resource efficiency, energy efficiency and fuel switching (mainly to electricity and low carbon hydrogen) Introduction of demand-side measures (e.g. product standards, product labelling) Develop business models and negotiate contracts for initial industrial CCUS, including transport & storagePotential CCUS expansion  Build CCUS capacity and infrastructure in clusters, including transport and storage networksbeyond clusters Net Zero consistent UK Emissions 4 CCUS clusters Trading Scheme cap (by 2024 latest)capturing 6MtCO  At least 2 CCUS clusters by mid-2020s2industrial emissions per year by 2030 Improvements to energy efficiency of buildings to reduce emissions and make them ready for low-carbon heating technologies Accelerate heat pump rollout, reducing costs by growing and expanding UK manufacturingDeployment of low carbon heat increases and market continues to transform – technology mix dependent on role of hydrogenTransformation of heat networks – introducing the market framework and zoning Hydrogen Depending on hydrogen decision, prepare for conversion of gas gridvillage trialHydrogen town before the end of the decade, Decide on role of hydrogen in buildings600,000 heat pumps installed per yearsubject to hydrogen Off-gas-grid Hydrogen Future Homes decisionregulations for neighbourhood & Future non-domestic trialBuildings Upgrading fuel poor buildings, subject Standards homes to EPC Band Off-gas-grid regulations forto consultationfrom 2025C by 2030 where domestic buildings, subject to consultationaffordable & practicable 202520232027203020212022202620292024202820 dicate the year milestones will occur rather than the precise point in a given year, while arrows of activity are inclusive of the years in which they start and finish
ure 1 ower uel upply & ydrogen dustry eat & uildings Markers in
g P FSH In HB e: 
Fi ot
N
88Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
6,000 high powered EV chargepoints on England’s strategic road network All new cars  and vans sold zero emission at the tailpipe Reduce amount of municipal waste going to landfill to 10% by 2035 Recycle 65% municipal waste by 2035 GGRs deployed at scale, reaching around 23MtCO 2 captured per year 35
Accelerate modal shift to public and active transport  Increasing targets for low carbon fuels and development of key infrastructure, including ongoing rail electrification and EV chargepoints Continue to accelerate the uptake of zero emission vehicles Hydrogen trials: buses, HGVs, rail, shipping R&D into low carbon aviation & shippingRamp up supply and production of sustainable aviation fuels, and deployment of new zero emission vessels and fuels  Mandate supply of  sustainable50% of all journey aviation fuel, subject to consultationin towns & cities cycled or walked New CO wregulatory Sale of new petrol & 2Decision on HGVs technology in mid-2020sframework for all road diesel cars & vans vehicles introducedphased out from 2030 Explore introduction of proven agricultural innovation measures, potentially including the use of feed additives for livestockTreble tree planting rates by the end of this parliamentSustainable increase in tree-planting, peatland restoration and perennial energy crops Continue to develop evidence of land-use synergies and trade-Rollout of environmental land management schemes: Sustainable Farming Incentive, Local Nature Recovery offs to inform policy approachscheme, Landscape Recovery scheme Hydroflurocarbonson  Explore policies to wrk towards the near elimnation of biodegradable municipal waste to landfill by 2028omarket reduced by 79% on 2015 levels Interim outcome of Piloting and early roll out of new environmental land  by 2030land use change  30,000 hectares tree plantingmanagement schemesanalyses inform per year across the UK from 2025 onwardsapproachBiomass Strategy to determine amount of Work with water sustainable biomass available to UK35,000 hectares peatland companies to plant 11m Launch of Farming for restored by 2025trees by 2030Launch Farming Innovation ProgrammeNet Zero campaign CCUS transport and storage rollout provides capacity for capture CO2 Regulatory framework unlocks capital for early projectsand long term market ‘First of a kind’ greenhouse gas removals deploy at scale & increasingGreenhouse gas removals business models enable early ‘First of a Kind’ plants Engineered removals Consult on innovative financing capturing at least models for DACCS & other GGRs 5MtCO 2per year from 2030  Review optionsReview pace of GGRs  for deployingscale up Biomass Strategy to inform role  GGRs at scale, that BECCS can play and options  followingfor deployment demonstrationcompetition 2120252023202720302022202620292024202820 ate the year milestones will rather than the precise point in a given year, while arrows of activity are inclusive of the year they run to start and finish
0 c
Transport Natural  Resources,  Waste & F-gases Green-house Gas Removals 2 e: Markers indi
ot
N
89Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Endnotes
1  BEIS analysis (2021), ‘Final UK greenhouse gas emission national statistics: 1990 to 2019’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-
statistics-1990-to-2019
2  HM Treasury (2021), ‘Net Zero Review: Final Report’.
3  OBR (2021), ‘Fiscal Risks Report’, https://obr.uk/frr/fiscal-risks-report-july-2021/
4  BEIS (2021), ‘Impact Assessment for the sixth carbon budget’, https://www.legislation.gov.uk/
ukdsi/2021/9780348222616/impacts  
5  Production methods include: electrolysis, which splits water into hydrogen and oxygen using 
electricity; steam methane reformation with CCUS, which uses heat, steam, and catalysts 
to break methane (from natural gas) into hydrogen and carbon dioxide which is then stored 
underground; and biomass gasification with CCUS, where heating biomass in special 
conditions produces a mix of gases including hydrogen and carbon dioxide which is used or 
permanently stored.
6  BEIS analysis based on 2019 data from the BEIS, Digest of UK Energy Statistics, https://www.
gov.uk/government/collections/digest-of-uk-energy-statistics-dukes#2021
7  These scenarios have been developed using whole system cost-optimisation modelling (UK 
TIMES) to produce a feasible range of least-cost solutions and deployment requirements for 
given emissions targets.
8  Terrawatt-hour is a unit of energy equal to one trillion watts for one hour to indicate energy 
generation and demand.
9  Emissions from Greenhouse Gas Removals only include engineered removals. Nature-based 
solutions, such as afforestation, are included in the Agriculture and LULUCF subsector. For 
further detail see the Natural Resources, Waste & F-Gases and Greenhouse Gas Removals 
chapters.
10  Estimates of historical UK GHG emissions are revised annually to incorporate methodological 
improvements, updated data and changes to international guidelines. The percentage 
reductions implied by CB levels are therefore subject to change.
11  BEIS analysis (2021), ‘Final UK greenhouse gas emission national statistics: 1990 to 2019’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-
statistics-1990-to-2019
12  Transport emissions include emissions from domestic transport and international aviation and 
shipping.
13  BEIS (2021), ‘UK Hydrogen Strategy’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-
hydrogen-strategy
90Chapter 2 – The Journey to Net Zero
91Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Reducing 
Emissions 
across the 
Economy
3
Chapter93Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
3i. Power
Delivering a decarbonised power system by 2035
Our Key Commitments
•  Take action so that by 2035, all our electricity will come from low carbon sources, 
subject to security of supply, bringing forward the government’s commitment to a 
fully decarbonised power system by 15 years.
•  Accelerate deployment of low-cost renewable generation, such as wind and 
solar through the Contracts for Difference scheme by undertaking a review of the 
frequency of the CfD auctions.
•  Deliver 40GW of offshore wind, including 1GW of innovative floating offshore 
wind by 2030.
•  Implement the Dispatchable Power Agreement (DPA) to support the deployment of 
first of a kind power CCUS plant(s).
•  Secure a final investment decision on a large-scale nuclear plant by the end of this 
Parliament whilst taking measures to inform investment decisions during the next 
Parliament on further nuclear projects as we work towards our net zero target. 
•  Adopt a new approach to onshore and offshore electricity networks to incorporate 
new low carbon generation and demand in the most efficient manner, taking 
account of the environment and local communities.
•  Deliver the actions in our recent Smart Systems and Flexibility Plan and Energy 
Digitalisation Strategy to maximise system flexibility.
•  Provide £380m for our world-leading offshore wind sector, investing in supply 
chains, infrastructure and early-coordination of offshore transmission networks, 
securing jobs and benefitting communities across the UK.
•  Reform system governance so that the whole system can achieve our net zero 
ambitions and meet consumers’ needs.
•  Drive market-wide rollout of smart meters with a new four-year policy framework 
that introduces fixed minimum annual installation targets for energy suppliers from 1 
January 2022.
•  Consider whether broader reforms to our market frameworks are needed to unlock 
the full potential of low carbon technologies to take us all the way to net zero.
•  Ensure that consumers pay a fair, affordable price for their energy, and can engage 
with a retail energy market that offers the products and services required to make 
choices that support net zero. 
94Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
•  Ensure the planning system can support the deployment of low carbon energy 
infrastructure.
•  Explore the system need and case for further market intervention for long duration 
storage and hydrogen in power.
Progress to date
1. The transformation of the power sector  decade. Since then we have launched a 
over the last 30 years provides a strong basis  £17.5 million competition to support innovative 
on which to move forward, on our way to  floating wind ideas for industry and initiated 
reaching net zero emissions by 2050 across  this year’s Contract for Difference allocation 
the UK economy. Decarbonising the power  round, with a £200 million budget for offshore 
sector has led the UK’s efforts to reduce GHG  wind and £24 million for floating offshore wind. 
emissions overall.  On delivering new and advanced nuclear 
power, we have committed to reaching a final 
2. In 2019, net UK GHG emissions from 
investment decision on a large-scale nuclear 
the power sector totalled 58 MtCO e and 
2 plant this parliament, subject to value for 
accounted for 11% of total net UK GHG 
money and approvals. We are in negotiations 
emissions.1 This is a reduction of 72% 
with the developer on Sizewell C project in 
between 1990 and 2019. In 1990, the 
Suffolk. We have since taken further steps: 
power sector accounted for 23% of UK 
in June, we announced that phasing out of 
GHG emissions.2 This has largely been 
unabated coal generation will be brought 
achieved through natural gas generation 
forward by one year, to October 2024.3 In 
and renewables displacing coal, and more 
July, we published the Smart Systems and 
energy efficient appliances contributing to the 
Flexibility plan 2021 and the UK’s first Energy 
reduction of electricity demand. Today, the 
Digitalisation Strategy, jointly developed with 
country gets over half of its power from low 
InnovateUK. Our approach includes measures 
carbon technologies.
to facilitate flexibility from consumers, 
3. In 2020, we published the Ten Point Plan  removing barriers to flexibility on the grid 
for a Green Industrial Revolution and the  including long duration storage, reforming 
Energy White Paper, including commitments  markets to reward flexibility, and digitalising 
to put the power sector on an ambitious  our energy system.
decarbonisation pathway over the next 
95Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Net zero transition and opportunities for the sector
Our 2050 vision and how  6. Based on our whole-system modelling, 
by 2050, emissions associated with power 
we get there
could need to drop by 95-98% compared to 
4. Reliable and affordable power is a  2019, down to 1-3 MtCO e. In the interim, to 
2
foundation of a modern industrial economy.   meet our NDC and CB6 targets, we expect 
It is also critical in decarbonising the economy  emissions could fall by 71-76% by 2030 and 
and achieving our net zero goal cost  80-85% by 2035, compared to 2019 levels. 
effectively. Although ambitious decarbonisation  These figures are based on an indicative 
is required in every sector, deep reductions in  power sector pathway contributing to the 
emissions from power could offset the need  whole-economy net zero and interim targets 
for relatively more expensive decarbonisation  (see figure 17 below).
efforts elsewhere. Our exposure to volatile 
gas prices shows the importance of our plan 
for a strong home-grown renewable power 
sector to strengthen our energy security into 
the future.
5. The next 30 years will see a decisive 
and permanent shift away from the use 
of unabated oil and gas as the engine of 
our economy. In the Energy White Paper, 
published in December 2020, we set out 
what this means for the power sector.4 Low 
carbon power is expected to become the 
predominant form of energy in 2050. It will 
account for approximately 50% or higher 
share of final energy consumption, up from 
10% in 2019,5 as it displaces petrol in light 
vehicles and gas for heat in homes. 
96Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Figure 17: Indicative power emissions pathway to 2037
225500
220000
e)
2
O
115500
C
t
M
 (
s
n
o
si 110000
s
mi
E
5500
Pre-EWP & NZS policies
and proposals
2050
Range
NZS delivery
pathway
00
11999900 11999955 22000000 22000055 22001100 22001155 22002200 22002255 22003300 22003355 22004400 22004455 22005500
Source: BEIS analysis 
7. Even with major improvements in overall  9. Our understanding of the role of power 
energy efficiency and increased flexibility in  in 2050, what the system will look like and 
the energy system, this could represent a  the level of demand it will need to meet, will 
potential doubling of demand. This would  evolve over time. This will be informed by the 
require a four-fold increase in low carbon  approach to decarbonising other sectors, 
electricity generation and significant expansion  such as the extent to which hydrogen is 
of the networks that transport it to where it  used for heat, and what we learn about the 
is needed.  cost and achievability of those approaches. 
It will also be informed by the availability and 
8. We will need to achieve this whilst 
costs of GHG removal technologies, such as 
maintaining a reliable and affordable supply of 
bioenergy with carbon capture and storage 
power. We cannot compromise the essential 
(BECCS) and direct air carbon capture and 
resilience and reliability of the energy system. 
storage (DACCS). 
It is essential for the critical services we rely 
on – from hospitals to traffic lights and mobile 
devices – and its reliability will be fundamental 
to consumer confidence in adopting new ways 
of powering their cars or heating their homes.
97Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
10. The Energy White Paper set out our goal  12. Our Carbon Budget 6 trajectory 
of a fully decarbonised, reliable, and low-cost  suggests that we will need to build all of 
power system by 2050. CB6 represents  these technologies at, or close to, their 
a very significant increase in the pace of  maximum technical limit, to meet the twin 
power sector decarbonisation, coupled with  challenge of accelerating decarbonisation and 
increased demand due to the accelerated  servicing increased demand. This represents 
action in other sectors dependent on low  a considerable delivery challenge. While 
carbon electricity. Although the Energy White  unabated gas generation currently plays 
Paper envisaged achieving an overwhelmingly  a critical role in keeping the UK electricity 
decarbonised power system during the 2030s,  system secure and stable, it will be used less 
we have since increased our ambition further.  frequently in the future, running only when the 
By 2035, all our electricity will need to come  system most needs it for security of supply.
from low carbon sources, subject to security 
13. The government is actively taking steps 
of supply, bringing forward the government’s 
to bring forward low carbon technologies 
commitment to a fully decarbonised power 
capable of replicating the role of unabated 
system by 15 years, whilst meeting a 40-60% 
gas in the electricity system, including 
increase in demand. 
CCUS-enabled generation, hydrogen-fired 
11. However, the Energy White Paper’s  generation, BECCS, and flexible storage. We 
fundamental approach remains unchanged. A  are also bringing forward measures to ensure 
low-cost, net zero consistent electricity system  that any new build combustion power stations, 
is most likely to be composed predominantly  including gas, can convert to clean alternatives 
of wind and solar generation, whether in  in the future. We issued a call for evidence on 
2035 or 2050. To ensure the system is  our plans for Decarbonisation Readiness in 
reliable, intermittent renewables need to be  the summer and subject to feedback on the 
complemented by known technologies such  proposals and parliamentary time, we aim to 
as nuclear and power CCUS, and flexible  implement these requirements by 2023.6
technologies such as interconnectors, 
14. The use of hydrogen to generate 
electricity storage, and demand-side 
electricity can reduce reliance on unabated 
response. These flexible technologies can 
natural gas. It can also provide additional 
help to minimise the amount of generation 
system flexibility if produced through 
and network capacity needed to meet our 
electrolysis and where there is hydrogen 
demand needs, for example, by matching new 
storage. This could contribute to energy 
sources of demand to renewable generation 
security, lowering emissions and system costs. 
both nationally and locally. To do this, the new 
There are trade-offs between the deliverability, 
critical supply chains for these technologies 
optimal fit, and other benefits of emerging 
also need to be resilient to ensure the 
technologies versus known technologies. 
UK can build the capacity it needs for a 
Waiting for emerging technologies before 
reliable system.
deciding to deploy nuclear and power CCUS 
at scale could put our CB6 and net zero 
ambitions at risk. Over the next decade 
we need to continue to deploy all known 
low carbon technologies at scale to ensure 
optionality is maintained, whilst developing 
new options to mitigate delivery risk and 
reduce costs. 
98Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
15. However, a reliable power system is  contribute to our industrial ‘SuperPlaces’,  
not only about having a balanced mix of  providing plentiful low carbon electricity to 
generation technologies. We also need to  enable the low carbon technologies such as 
ensure that the networks can transport  hydrogen, which also offers a renewed era for 
electricity to where it is required in a  our industrial heartlands.
cost-effective manner, and to enable crucial 
18. To fully decarbonise the power sector 
system services such as frequency response. 
at the pace we have set out whilst meeting 
Markets should determine the best solution 
increasing demand, total public and private 
for such a system. We are not targeting a 
investment of £280-400 billion is needed 
particular solution but will rely on competition 
in generation capacity and flexible assets 
to spur investment in technologies which are 
– around £150-270 billion of this reflects 
cheaper and more efficient; and on innovation 
increased ambition from Carbon Budget 6. 
to reduce the cost of existing options. The 
The electricity transmission and distribution 
government’s role is to ensure a market 
networks will also both require significant 
framework which encourages effective 
expenditures with an additional £20-30 billion 
competition and delivers an affordable, secure, 
required by 2037 to maintain and reinforce 
and reliable system that is, consistent with net 
Great Britain’s electricity network. 
zero emissions. We will intervene to address 
any potential market failures and continue to  19. The offshore wind sector alone will 
invest in innovation which helps commercialise  see over £20 billion in private investment 
new technologies and increase the options  by 2030, and in the last six months around 
available to meet this challenge. £1.5 billion of investment has already been 
announced. This includes two purpose-built 
16. The CCC’s Independent Assessment 
manufacturing ports and five offshore wind 
of UK Climate Risk (June 2021)7 set out 
turbine component factories. 
that climate change will likely result in more 
extreme weather that has the potential  20. Decarbonising the power sector will 
to negatively impact GB’s power sector.  regenerate communities and open up new 
We continue to work closely with industry,  employment opportunities right around the 
regulators, sector bodies, and other  UK. Based on current estimates, policies and 
stakeholders to ensure that our electricity  proposals to reduce emissions in the sector 
system is resilient and secure, including to the  could support up to 59,000 jobs in 2024 and 
impacts of climate change. up to 120,000 jobs in 2030. 
Seizing new opportunities 21. For example, the offshore wind sector 
could support up to 60,000 jobs by 2030, 
17. Transforming the power system offers 
including in the supply chain, with further 
significant opportunities for UK businesses to 
employment opportunities during construction. 
exploit technology and know-how in domestic 
Increased deployment of storage and demand 
and global markets. Investments in innovation 
side flexibility could support up to 7,000 
will enable new technologies to deliver benefits 
jobs, levelling up the power sector across 
to the system and this will be crucial to help 
Great Britain. 
us meeting our carbon reduction targets. 
Innovation will create value by accelerating 
the commercialisation of low carbon power 
systems. It can bring costs down, enable 
us to preserve and develop options and 
bring forward information to reduce future 
uncertainty. Renewable energy can also help 
99Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Policies and proposals
Prioritising critical system enablers building, ownership, and operation of onshore 
network assets, on which we published a 
22. Crucially, a whole system approach 
consultation in August.
puts more emphasis on addressing critical 
system enablers. These measures will  24. We will look to deliver these changes 
integrate different low carbon technologies  whilst minimising the impacts on citizens 
into a coherent, single entity and optimise the  and communities. Network companies work 
system most efficiently and cost-effectively, in  closely with local and transport authorities and 
the interest of consumers.  are incentivised to deliver network upgrades 
as efficiently as possible both domestically 
23. This means adopting a new approach to 
and through the RIIO price control framework, 
developing and delivering electricity networks, 
for example by laying larger cables to avoid 
both onshore and offshore, to ensure that new 
reopening roads twice. Connection upgrades 
low carbon generation can be connected to 
are becoming increasingly digitalised for 
growing sources of demand. The Offshore 
domestic customers looking to install a 
Transmission Network Review (OTNR) 
heat pump or electric vehicle chargepoints. 
is transforming how the connections for 
In cases where network upgrades require 
offshore wind and other offshore transmission 
a temporary power disruption, network 
infrastructure is planned, designed, and 
companies are required to give notice to 
delivered with changes being progressed 
customers of planned outages. Advice and 
across the near, medium, and long term. 
ongoing information is also provided including 
Coordination in how we connect offshore 
support for vulnerable customers, such as 
wind can potentially save consumers between 
providing generators for customers who are 
£3-6 billion by 2050 and reduce the number 
medically dependent on electricity.
of assets and onshore landing points by 
up to 50%.8 Ofgem has recently consulted  25. The deployment of smart technologies 
upon regulatory changes to enable offshore  and flexibility will underpin our energy security 
coordination for in-flight projects, including  and the transition to net zero. Flexibility from 
potentially allowing anticipatory investment.  technologies such as energy storage, smart 
BEIS is currently consulting on a new  and bidirectional charging of electric vehicles, 
long-term policy regime for offshore networks.  flexible heating systems, and interconnection 
Onshore, we welcome electricity networks’  could save up to £10 billion per year by 
efforts to invest strategically ahead of need in  2050 by reducing the amount of generation 
new capacity, where it is efficient to do so, as  and network needed to decarbonise.9 
well as Ofgem’s work to create a price control  These technologies offset the need for more 
framework which allows and encourages this.  expensive capital investment in traditional 
In recognition of the essential role of electricity  infrastructure, as well as help optimise how 
networks as an enabler of net zero, we will  efficiently the system operates by better 
publish, jointly with Ofgem, an Electricity  integrating intermittent renewables into the 
Network Strategy, which will set out how we  system and reducing peak demand.
will facilitate an agile, flexible onshore network 
that allows the rapid, transformational change 
required while responding to consumer 
and energy system needs. This will include 
our plans to introduce competition in the 
100Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
26. A key enabler for demand side flexibility  28. This transformation of the energy system 
will be smart meters, which enable innovative  means our approach to system governance 
products and services such as smart  needs to evolve to help the whole energy 
time-of-use tariffs. These tariffs reward  system achieve our net zero ambitions and 
consumers financially for using energy  meet consumers’ needs at the least cost. 
outside peak times, when demand is low or  BEIS and Ofgem have jointly consulted on 
when there is excess generation available.  the future of system operation.11 We set out 
Technologies such as electric vehicles and  proposals for an expert and impartial Future 
smart appliances can be automatically  System Operator (FSO) with responsibilities 
programmed to take advantage of cheaper  across both the electricity and gas systems, 
rates, cost-effectively integrating them  to drive progress towards net zero while 
with renewable energy sources and saving  maintaining energy security and minimising 
consumers money. At the end of June 2021,  costs for consumers. These proposals set out 
there were 25.2 million smart and advanced  how detailed expertise gained from system 
meters in homes and small businesses  operation could be used to provide a whole 
across Great Britain, representing 46%  energy system approach to coordination 
smart coverage.10 and planning while ensuring that market 
participants and government has confidence 
27. The Smart Systems and Flexibility Plan 
in the impartiality of the FSO’s advice 
sets out a vision, analysis, and actions for 
and facilitation of markets, competition, 
delivering a smart and flexible energy system. 
and system development. We have also, 
We will facilitate flexibility from consumers and 
jointly with Ofgem, consulted on the future 
remove barriers to flexibility on the grid, both 
governance of energy codes, which set out 
for small-scale and large-scale long-duration 
the detailed technical and commercial rules 
electricity storage, as well as driving policy to 
for the system, building on the government 
increase interconnector capacity. The Plan 
and Ofgem’s joint review of code governance 
also sets out actions to improve market design 
and the work of the independent panel on 
and coordination so that flexibility providers 
engineering standards.12
can secure revenues across multiple markets. 
Data and digitalisation are a core aspect of  29. Significant progress towards net zero can 
the future system; we have set out a strategic  happen, and is already happening, within our 
approach to digitalisation and opening data  existing market framework. This combines 
across the energy sector through the Energy  markets for wholesale power, balancing, and 
Digitalisation Strategy. system services with a Contracts for Difference 
scheme (CfD) for low carbon generation and a 
capacity market to ensure security of supply. 
We have recently published a Call for Evidence 
on actions to better align the capacity market 
with net zero,13 including potential actions 
to encourage the participation of more low 
carbon capacity. However, it will be necessary 
to consider whether broader reforms to our 
market frameworks are needed to unlock the 
full potential of low carbon technologies to 
take us to net zero.
101Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
30. Throughout the transition, consumers  32. We will need to consider how low 
should pay a fair, affordable price for their  carbon energy infrastructure can be 
electricity, and be able to engage with a retail  deployed at an unprecedented scale and 
energy market that offers the products and  pace sympathetically alongside the interests 
services that allow them to make choices that  of communities and consistent with our 
support net zero. To support these aims, the  obligations to a sustainable environment, both 
government is considering what reforms to  land-based and marine. We will also need to 
the retail energy market are needed to support  streamline the consenting process to ensure 
progress to net zero through the 2020s,  that the deployment needed to stay on track 
including the role of suppliers and how they  for our 2030 and CB6 targets is delivered.
are regulated.14 In considering these reforms, 
33. In addition, we will need to grow 
the government will take account of the 
our supply of skilled workers and further 
lessons of the current market, in which high 
strengthen the UK supply chain to service 
gas prices have placed financial pressures 
the demands of energy infrastructure, 
on suppliers. In the future, the market will 
creating economic opportunity for citizens 
need to be resilient and sustainable, and 
and communities across the UK. The 
continue to protect consumers as we move 
£160 million announced in the Ten Point 
to a net zero system. The market will also 
Plan, has substantially grown our industrial 
need to remain competitive, and consumers 
capabilities in the offshore wind sector. To 
will need to be engaged with positive choices 
help keep us on track for our Carbon Budget 
about their energy supply. To support these 
6 and net zero targets we will need to deploy 
choices, consumers should receive accurate 
substantial volumes of floating offshore wind. 
information about the carbon content of 
Our target of 1 GW floating offshore wind by 
their energy products, and we will consider 
2030 is a stepping stone to further growth 
the case for reforming the framework which 
in the UK, which will also develop jobs and 
underpins green electricity tariffs and wider 
opportunities in the associated industrial 
environmental carbon accounting schemes. 
supply chain putting us at the forefront of this 
31. We will also need to address  new technology that can utilise our North and 
cross-cutting, overarching enablers such  Celtic Seas. We will build on this with £380m 
as ensuring the planning system has the  for our world-leading offshore wind sector, 
capacity to support the deployment of low  investing in supply chains, infrastructure and 
carbon energy infrastructure, while also  early-coordination of offshore transmission 
representing the interests of the environment  networks, securing jobs and benefitting 
and of the communities which host this  communities across the UK.
infrastructure. We will do this by updating the 
energy National Policy Statements to provide 
greater clarity on the need and urgency for 
low carbon infrastructure, exploring ways of 
streamlining processes through the Nationally 
Significant Infrastructure Projects (NSIP) 
reform programme and addressing issues 
at a strategic level, for example through the 
Offshore Wind Enabling Actions Programme. 
102Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Supporting sustained deployment of  37. This step change in renewable 
low carbon generation deployment will be achieved primarily by 
providing ongoing support through the CfD 
34. While our strategic approach to  scheme, starting with allocation round 4 this 
decarbonising power in line with CB6 is  December – which will be the biggest-ever 
predicated on a whole system approach,  round of our flagship renewable energy 
with a key role for the market in delivering  scheme. The CfD will be key to delivering 
the most efficient solution, part of the CB6  the levels of generation required by 2030. To 
challenge is nonetheless one of deploying low  support this step change we will undertake a 
carbon electricity generation infrastructure  review of the frequency of the CfD auctions. 
at an unprecedented scale and pace whilst  Looking beyond this, ensuring we retain 
maintaining optionality for more nascent  effective means to provide long-term stability 
sources for power generation, such as  will be crucial throughout the 2030s to achieve 
hydrogen, to help reduce the risk of delivery.  affordable, scalable deployment.
In a scenario with higher electricity demand, if 
38. We also need to increase our nuclear 
there is no hydrogen generation in the power 
capacity, which is why we said in the Energy 
sector, we are likely to need to build all known 
White Paper that we will aim to bring at 
technologies at or close to their maximum 
least one large-scale nuclear project to the 
deployment potential by the mid-2030s.
point of final investment decision by the end 
35. In the Energy White Paper, we committed  of this Parliament, subject to clear value 
to a target of 40 GW of offshore wind by  for money and all relevant approvals. In 
2030, including 1 GW floating wind, alongside  December 2020 we announced the start of 
the expansion of other low-cost renewable  formal negotiations on Sizewell C and those 
technologies. We need to continue to drive  negotiations are ongoing. To facilitate a 
rapid deployment of renewables, for example  decision this Parliament, we plan to establish 
offshore wind, so we can reach substantially  the Regulated Asset Base model to fund new 
greater capacity beyond 2030, and accelerate  nuclear projects at a low cost of capital, saving 
the cost reduction and commercialisation of  consumers money.
floating offshore wind. As we decarbonise 
39. The government will also take measures 
our electricity system our wholesale prices 
to inform investment decisions during the 
will become less exposed to fluctuations in 
next Parliament on further nuclear projects 
global fossil fuel prices, and we would expect 
as we work towards our net zero target. 
wholesale prices to be lower.
This will include consideration of large-
36. CB6 also requires a sustained increase  scale and advanced nuclear technologies, 
to the deployment of land-based renewables  including Small Modular Reactors (SMRs) 
such as locally supported onshore wind and  and potentially Advanced Modular Reactors 
solar in the 2020s and beyond. We will seek  (AMRs). As part of this, we are announcing 
to ensure a facilitative environment for the  a new £120 million Future Nuclear Enabling 
deployment of unsubsidised rooftop solar to  Fund to provide targeted support in relation 
complement our market-based approach of  to barriers to entry. Further details of how this 
ensuring exporters receive a fair price through  fund will operate will be published in 2022 
the Smart Export Guarantee. We also have  alongside details of a roadmap for deployment 
one of the best ocean energy resources in the  that takes into account value for money.
world and we continue to explore the role of 
marine technologies in net zero.
103Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
40. We are also providing funding for a  42. Bioenergy has already played a significant 
SMR design through our £385m Advanced  role in decarbonising the electricity system, 
Nuclear Fund and are progressing plans for an  accounting for 12.6% of total renewables 
Advanced Modular Reactor demonstrator in  generation in 2019.15 Technological changes 
the early 2030s.  Whether large- or small-scale  mean that biomass usage can now go beyond 
projects, there remain a number of possible  carbon-neutral and deliver negative emissions 
sites available for these options, including  by combining it with carbon capture and 
Wylfa in North Wales. storage (BECCS). As committed to in the 
Energy White Paper, we will publish a Biomass 
41. To help deliver emissions reductions to 
Strategy in 2022 that will set out how BECCS 
keep us on track for Carbon Budget 6, we will 
could be deployed. As is the case with all 
need significant expansion of power CCUS 
UK biomass use, any future BECCS projects 
beyond the Energy White Paper commitment 
will need to meet stringent sustainability and 
of one power plant by 2030. To do this we will 
air quality requirements for the production 
implement the Dispatchable Power Agreement 
and use of biomass, as will be set out in the 
(DPA), and seek to bring forward at least one 
Biomass Strategy. 
power CCUS plant in the mid 2020’s through 
the CCUS Cluster Sequencing Process, 
subject to the outcome of that process 
including value for money and affordability 
considerations. We will also aim to begin 
competitive allocation in the 2020’s to support 
a future pipeline of projects and cost reduction 
via increased deployment and competitive 
tension. Finally, we will continue to review and 
evolve the policy framework to stimulate the 
delivery of future power CCUS projects. 
104Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Reducing delivery risk •  Maximising system flexibility, including 
through storage technologies, demand 
43. Although we need to ensure we can 
side response, and interconnectors – 
deploy existing low carbon generation 
to integrate renewables, balancing the 
technologies at close to their maximum to 
intermittency of renewables and helping to 
reach Carbon Budget 6, we also need to 
maintain system operability;
de-risk the delivery challenge. We will pursue 
•  Promoting more ambitious and 
innovative technology solutions which ease 
sustained demand reduction and 
the pressure, including:
energy efficiency measures to reduce 
•  Exploring the system need and case for  overall power demand – allowing 
market intervention for long duration  demand to increase unconstrained as 
storage and hydrogen in power –  we electrify other parts of the economy 
both technologies have the potential to  could prevent us hitting very low levels of 
provide important low carbon peaking  emissions during the 2030s.
capacity during periods of high demand 
and over extreme events such as long 
periods of low wind. Long duration 
storage technologies could provide a 
range of system stability services such 
as the provision of inertia. An expansion 
of hydrogen in power could also reduce 
the need to build other technologies at 
the limit of what is technically feasible and 
could be a form of storage for excess 
power generated by renewables. We are 
supporting innovation in longer duration 
energy storage projects through a 
£68 million competition for prototypes and 
demonstrators;16
•  Reducing emissions from the energy 
from waste sector – emissions from 
energy from waste plants represent a 
significant part of the residual emissions in 
the power sector. We are exploring options 
to reduce emissions from these plants 
within the power sector, including whether 
support for CCUS at Energy from Waste 
plants could be provided by the Industrial 
Carbon Capture Business Model. The 
Government’s approach in respect of this 
is still under consideration and we intend 
to provide further details later this year; 
105Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Working together across the UK 
Examples of policy action by the Scottish Government, Welsh Government, 
and Northern Ireland Executive 
UK Government is working across all  A further £80 million of this funding will 
levels of government and with Devolved  be directed to projects supporting the 
Administrations to ensure consistent action  development of carbon capture, utilisation and 
to reduce emissions across the power sector,  storage and negative emission technology 
and across the UK. projects in Scotland. 
Wales  The purpose of the hydrogen funding 
programme is to support the delivery of the 
The Welsh Government has supported the 
Scottish Government’s upcoming Hydrogen 
development of four regional energy strategies 
Action Plan, the development of a hydrogen 
that identify the scale of change  needed 
economy in Scotland, to help overcome 
to reach a low carbon energy system and 
challenges to scaling up hydrogen production 
establish regional priorities for energy. This 
and to deliver lasting benefits for business and 
work models future demand for power, heat 
communities. 
and transport, and assesses the economic 
impact of delivering the proposed ambitions. Northern Ireland 
In addition, Conwy and Newport local  Northern Ireland has already demonstrated 
authority areas are piloting local area energy  its commitment to decarbonisation of the 
planning. This work will identify the low-regret  power sector through rolling out renewable 
actions to decarbonise a local energy system  electricity generation under the Northern 
and can be used by grid network operators to  Ireland Renewables Obligation (NIRO) - 45.4% 
inform their infrastructure investment. of the electricity consumed in Northern Ireland 
between 1 July 2020 and 30 June 2021 
Scotland 
was generated from renewable sources. 
Building on this achievement and with a 
The Scottish Government’s £62 million Energy 
view to meeting the ambition of net zero 
Transition Fund will support Scotland’s energy 
by 2050, the Minister for the Economy, in 
sector and the North East, over the next five 
considering requirements for the NI Energy 
years, to make progress on energy transition 
Strategy (to be published by end of 2021), has 
as Scotland moves toward a net zero 
set a renewable electricity target of at least 
society by 2045. 
70% by 2030.
The Emerging Energy Technologies Fund is a 
£180 million package of funding over five years 
that will provide capital support to accelerate 
low carbon infrastructure projects that will 
be essential to deliver net zero. The Fund 
will make £100 million available to support 
hydrogen projects in line with the Scottish 
Government’s Hydrogen Policy Statement. 
106Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
3ii. Fuel Supply and Hydrogen
Transitioning to a low carbon future
Our Key Commitments
•  An ambition for 5 GW UK low carbon hydrogen production capacity by 2030.
•  We have set up the Industrial Decarbonisation and Hydrogen Revenue Support 
(IDHRS) scheme to fund our new hydrogen and industrial carbon capture business 
models. We will be providing up to £140m to establish the scheme, including up 
to £100m to award contracts of up to 250MW of electrolytic hydrogen production 
capacity in 2023 with further allocation in 2024.
•  Implement the £240 million Net Zero Hydrogen Fund and finalise the Hydrogen 
Business Model and the Low Carbon Hydrogen Standard in 2022.
•  Work with the sector to help develop a low carbon fuel strategy for transport for 
publication in 2022, as announced in the recent Transport Decarbonisation Plan, 
and deliver commitments on sustainable aviation fuels.
•  Work with stakeholders to address barriers to electrification of oil and gas 
production by Q4 2022 and continue to drive down routine flaring and venting. 
•  Regulate the oil and gas sector in a way that minimises GHG emissions, notably 
through the revised Oil and Gas Authority strategy, which empowers the OGA to 
assess operators’ plans to reduce their emissions levels against effectively a net 
zero test, and establish a climate compatibility checkpoint for future licensing on the 
UK Continental Shelf.
Progress to date 
1. In 2019 net UK GHG emissions from fuel  •  Transportation (‘midstream’) – 
supply totalled 26 MtCO e and accounted for  transportation and storage of oil and gas 
2
5% of total net UK GHG emissions. Emissions  including pipelines, pumping stations, 
today mainly derive from fossil fuels and can  trucks, and transcontinental tankers;
be attributed to stages of the supply journey.17 
This chapter covers all aspects of fuel 
supply emissions:
•  Extraction (‘upstream’) – exploration 
and production of oil and gas including 
drilling, surfacing resources and onshore 
processing at gas plants;
107Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
•  Refinement (‘downstream’) – refining oil  3. We have also made progress in low carbon 
into products including transport fuels,  fuel production. An estimated 10-27 TWh of 
bitumen, lubricating oils, liquid petroleum  hydrogen production now exists today but 
gasses, heating oils, marine fuels,  is almost all derived from fossil fuels without 
polymers, solvents, and alcohols. Refining  carbon capture and for use outside of the 
emissions are counted as part of the  energy system.18 In 2019, renewable fuels 
industry sector but are discussed in this  supplied under the Renewable Transport 
chapter to take a holistic view of supply. Fuel Obligation (RFTO) accounted for 5% of 
total road and non-road mobile machinery 
2. Overall, between 1990 and 2019, net 
fuel. This mainly consisted of biodiesel and 
UK GHG emissions from fuel supply have 
bioethanol but also included biomethane and 
decreased by 61%. North Sea production 
renewable hydrogen.19
has fallen; older, more polluting installations 
have been decommissioned whilst cleaner  4. Building on the Ten Point Plan, we recently 
ones have been brought online; regulatory  published the UK Hydrogen Strategy and 
frameworks have supported efficiency gains;  associated consultations on a hydrogen 
coal mines have closed; and iron pipes have  business model, the Net Zero Hydrogen Fund 
been replaced with plastic to reduce methane  (NZHF) and a low carbon hydrogen standard, 
leakage across the gas network. outlining our approach to kickstarting the 
production of low carbon hydrogen and 
developing a robust UK hydrogen economy. 
Net zero transition and economic opportunities 
Our 2050 vision and how we  6. Our fuel supply will look very different by 
2050. Oil and gas production will contract 
get there 
significantly as the UK Continental Shelf 
5. There is a need for widespread  matures and investment in the North Sea 
electrification across the economy, but we  pivots to new opportunities from CCUS 
cannot rely on electricity alone. Many end use  and hydrogen, accelerated by widespread 
sectors require low carbon energy including  electrification and low carbon fuel switching. 
those where electrification is not viable or  This shift away from fossil fuels will protect 
cost-effective, making the supply of cleaner  consumers from volatile gas prices. Remaining 
fuels essential to achieving net zero. oil and gas installations will use low carbon 
power, with residual emissions minimised. In 
the Energy White Paper, we committed to this, 
by stating that we will work with the oil and 
gas sector to transform the UK Continental 
Shelf into a net zero basin by 2050.
7. Refineries can play an important role in 
low carbon clusters utilising CCUS and low 
carbon fuels, and the production of low 
carbon fuels will increase significantly to meet 
demand where electrification is not viable. In 
these areas there will be significant scale up 
of hydrogen networks and storage, from new 
and repurposed existing infrastructure.
108Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
8. Based on our whole-system modelling, by  53-60% by 2035, compared to 2019 levels. 
2050, emissions associated with fuel supply  These figures are based on an indicative fuel 
could need to drop by 71-99% compared to  supply sector pathway contributing to the 
2019, down to 0-8 MtCO e. In the interim, to  whole-economy net zero and interim targets 
2
meet our NDC and CB6 targets, we expect  (see figure 18 below).
emissions could fall by 37-45% by 2030 and 
Figure 18: Indicative fuel supply emissions pathway to 2037
888000
777000
666000
e)
O2 555000
C
t
M
 ( 444000
s
n
o
si
s 333000
mi
Pre-Hydrogen Strategy & NSTD & 
E
NZS policies and proposals
222000
2050
Range
111000
NZS delivery
pathway
000
111999999000 111999999555 222000000000 222000000555 222000111000 222000111555 222000222000 222000222555 222000333000 222000333555 222000444000 222000444555 222000555000
Source: BEIS analysis
9. We have agreed ambitious interim targets  to fund projects to develop innovative low 
for emissions reductions with industry through  carbon hydrogen solutions. The UK Hydrogen 
the North Sea Transition Deal (NSTD) including  Strategy further sets out our comprehensive 
10% by 2025, 25% by 2027, and 50% by  approach to growing a UK hydrogen economy, 
2030 compared to a 2018 baseline. indicating that use of low carbon hydrogen 
enabled by 5 GW of production capacity could 
10. The Ten Point Plan announced our 
deliver total emissions savings of 41 MtCO e 
ambition for 5 GW of low carbon hydrogen  2
between 2023 and 2032, the equivalent of the 
production capacity by 2030, alongside steps 
carbon captured by 700 million trees over the 
to drive the uptake of sustainable aviation fuels 
same period. 
(SAF). Since then we have invested £3 million 
in kick starting the Tees Valley Hydrogen  11. Looking across a range of end use 
Transport Hub and announced a £60 million  scenarios, the UK Hydrogen Strategy 
Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2 Competition  suggests that we could need 7-20 GW of 
109Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
production capacity in 2035 and 15-60 GW  13. Drawing on the OECD’s ‘Trade in 
in 2050, depending on developments across  Embodied CO ’ database, as well as the 
2
heat, industry, transport, and power.20 Using  relative levels of trade openness of UK 
more specific end use assumptions, the  sectors, our analysis suggests that refineries 
illustrative pathway in this Strategy suggests  are currently amongst the areas most at 
production capacity in 2035 would need to  risk of carbon leakage. We are committed 
be 10 GW if heat is electrified, or 17 GW if  to mitigating this risk by engaging with 
hydrogen is used widely for heat.21 industry to better understand their concerns 
around carbon leakage. Further analysis and 
12. As the production of low carbon fuels 
information on the potential mitigations for 
replaces fossil fuels, we intend to follow the 
consideration are set out in HM Treasury’s Net 
following principles: 
Zero Review.
•  Integrating a whole system view. 
Seizing new opportunities 
We will take an economy-wide view, 
including to balance end-use sector  14. To achieve the level of emissions 
demands with supply side considerations,  reductions in the fuel supply sector indicated 
such as infrastructure and the operation  by our delivery pathway to 2037, we will need 
of the electricity and other fuel  additional public and private investment of  
supply sectors. £20-30 billion. 
•  Taking a portfolio approach.  
15. Government investment in domestic 
We will remain flexible to a supply mix of 
hydrogen production, to de-risk early projects, 
low carbon fuels that could be affected 
could also unlock private sector capital co-
by technologies in early development. As 
investment of over £4 billion by 2030. This 
demand grows, we expect innovators, 
could increase to £10-22 billion to meet the 
investors and producers will respond 
2037 delivery pathway in electrification and 
with advances delivering further cost 
hydrogen scenarios for heat respectively.22
or emissions savings. Our hydrogen 
modelling assumes a combination of 
electrolysis from renewable electricity, 
methane reformation with CCUS, and 
BECCS but we are aware of industry 
plans involving other production methods 
and will update our modelling with new 
technologies as evidence develops.
•  Minimising environmental impacts. 
Any impacts from low carbon fuel 
production on air quality or the 
environment must be kept under 
consideration and comply with evolving 
regulatory standards. We must maintain 
strict sustainability requirements for fuels 
to be eligible for government support 
schemes to achieve genuine emissions 
savings compared to fossil fuels and 
minimise environmental impacts. 
110Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
16. Decarbonising fuel supply and growth  18. Achieving our 5 GW ambition for 
of the hydrogen sector will regenerate  hydrogen production capacity could support 
communities and open up new employment  over 9,000 jobs in 2030, across the full 
opportunities right around the UK. Based  hydrogen value chain. Meeting the delivery 
on current estimates, policies and proposals  pathways set out in the Journey to Net Zero 
to reduce emissions in fuel supply and  chapter could support 13,000-19,000 jobs 
growing the hydrogen sector could support  across the hydrogen economy by 2035.23 
up to 10,000 jobs in 2030. We will build on 
19. Oil and gas will continue to play an 
existing commitments in the NSTD to facilitate 
important role as we transform from an 
reskilling and support 40,000 jobs across the 
economy based on fossil fuels to one based 
supply chain, ensuring everyone employed 
on clean energy. We will manage the transition 
in the sector can fulfil their potential. Many 
in a way that protects jobs and investment, 
skills will also be transferable to clean growth 
uses existing infrastructure, maintains security 
industries like offshore wind, CCUS and 
of supply, and accounts for climate risk.
hydrogen production. Producing low carbon 
hydrogen at scale will be made possible by 
carbon capture and storage infrastructure, 
and we plan to grow both of these new 
British industries side by side in industrail 
‘SuperPlaces’.
17. The development of a domestic SAF 
industry alone could generate support up 
to 1,000 jobs in 2030, with new jobs as 
plants are developed as well as opportunities 
to retain existing fuel expertise across the 
country. Industry has committed to creating 
an integrated skills plan to help its transition 
and diversification with strong support from 
government, academia, and trade unions. 
Case study: The Phillips 66 Humber refinery 
The sector can already compete on the world stage and provide domestic 
resilience by producing products essential for decarbonisation. UK refining 
includes a global leader and the only European producer of high-grade speciality 
coke for batteries used in electric vehicles and consumer electronic goods. 
The Phillips 66 Humber refinery’s world scale production capability is equivalent 
to 1.3 million electric vehicles (EV) per year. . Whilst the majority is currently 
exported, it has the potential to underpin a domestic UK battery industry and 
development of a broader EV battery manufacturing base in the UK.
111Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Policies and proposals
Oil and gas supply 22. The Oil and Gas Authority (OGA) 
published its revised strategy in February, 
20. We have always been clear that as we 
enshrining a range of new net zero obligations 
reduce our dependence on fossil fuels, the 
for the UK oil and gas industry. This is 
North Sea basin has a key role to play. Our 
reflected through the suite of levers available 
approach will ensure that it does contribute to 
to the OGA, making net zero a key factor in 
the transition, driving investment in transition 
its decisions, including to grant consent for 
technologies and providing the skills needed 
projects. It empowers the OGA to assess 
for net zero. However, we are clear that we do 
operators’ plans to reduce their emissions 
need to reduce our reliance on hydrocarbons 
levels against effectively a net zero test, in 
as swiftly as possible. The best way to protect 
accordance with its revised strategy, the OFS 
British businesses and consumers from 
can now encourage operators to invest in 
volatile international fossil fuel markets is to get 
transition technologies such as CCUS and 
our economy off hydrocarbons. 
hydrogen – seizing the economic opportunities 
available to the sector in a net zero future 
21. Upstream, the North Sea Transition Deal 
and living up to the commitments of the 
(NSTD) has set us on a transformational path 
Transition Deal. The Strategy also introduces 
to deliver the long-term skills, innovation, 
full societal carbon cost assessments into the 
infrastructure, and investment required to 
approvals process.
decarbonise oil and gas production and 
industry more widely. The deal will hold the 
23. Step-change abatement will be delivered 
industry to account on commitments it has 
by the electrification of existing and new 
made to halve its operational emissions 
offshore assets, through connections to 
by 2030, while supporting up to 40,000 
onshore networks or offshore renewables. We 
high-quality direct and indirect supply 
will work with regulators to review supporting 
chain jobs in Scotland and our industrial 
infrastructure in the Offshore Transmission 
heartlands in the North East, North West 
Network Review and to address regulatory 
and East of England. It also emphasises 
barriers. We will support removing further 
our shared commitment to achieving 10 
barriers through £1 million of additional 
MtCO /year of CCUS capacity, with industry 
funding from 2021 to 2022.
2
leveraging existing infrastructure to provide 
key transport and storage capability; and 
positions the sector to help deliver our 5 GW 
hydrogen ambition.
112Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
24. Beyond power generation, flaring and  27. Additional work is being carried out by 
venting account for most remaining upstream  the government and regulators to review 
emissions and we will need to be ambitious to  what action can be taken to further reduce 
allow us to stay on track for our CB6 target.  emissions. Improved measurement, reporting 
We have endorsed industry’s commitment in  and verification will play a critical role in this. 
the NSTD to accelerate reductions beyond  The government, including the Offshore 
the World Bank’s ‘Zero Routine Flaring by  Petroleum Regulator for Environment and 
2030’ initiative and new OGA guidance sets  Decommissioning, is working closely with 
out the expectation that all facilities should  the OGA to collect robust industry data 
have zero routine flaring and venting by 2030  which will enable effective implementation of 
or sooner. Industry is taking steps through  their strategy. The OGA’s tracking of overall 
its Methane Action Plan for continuous  emissions reductions and benchmarking 
emissions reductions with specific methane  of flaring and venting data will also improve 
emissions reduction targets, whilst setting the  performance across industry. Government and 
expectation that assets will have individual  regulators will continue to work with industry 
action plans by 2022.  to drive emissions reductions, including 
through improved process efficiency, to stay 
25. Further, following the conclusion of our 
on track for CB6.
review into the future of offshore oil and gas 
licensing earlier this year, we will also introduce  28. Midstream, the gas network must be 
a formal climate compatibility checkpoint  effective at minimising gas leakage and 
on future licensing rounds for oil and gas  associated emissions by replacing iron 
exploration. This will ensure future licences  pipes with plastic, even with gas demand 
are only awarded following a compatibility  decreasing leading to 2050. Through network 
assessment against the government’s  price controls, Ofgem has set gas distribution 
broad climate change ambitions, including  companies a target to replace 15,500km of 
reaching net zero by 2050. This checkpoint  iron mains and associated services in 5 years, 
will be designed by the end of 2021. We will  from April 2021. This will reduce leakage by 
be seeking input on the design through a  17% and emissions by 0.5 MtCO e. Additional 
2
consultation to be published before COP26. financial incentives will encourage further 
action through pressure management and gas 
26. This checkpoint builds on the existing 
conditioning. We continue to work with Ofgem 
checks within our regulatory system, including 
and HSE to review how best to continue to 
the OGA Strategy, and the role of the 
reduce methane leakage to 0% in all future 
Offshore Petroleum Regulator for Environment 
decarbonisation scenarios.
and Decommissioning (OPRED). These 
checks include a full environmental impact  29. Blending hydrogen into the gas grid 
assessment and a public consultation.  could also support initial steps to decarbonise 
heating. This will consider the air quality 
impacts of hydrogen combustion in domestic 
settings. Government is working closely with 
key delivery partners to explore options to 
blend hydrogen up to 20% by volume into 
the gas distribution network, and up to 2% 
into the gas transmission network, along with 
biomethane and natural gas. Subject to both 
the economic and safety case for blending 
being demonstrated, we are aiming to make a 
final decision on blending by the end of 2023.
113Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
30. We recognise that industry will need early  31. Acknowledging that the future demand 
sight of decisions should blending proceed  for gas will decline as we decarbonise, means 
and propose five principles for delivery: that the gas system will need to change to 
meet the net zero targets. We will publish a 
•  Safety. Blending must remain within 
call for evidence this autumn, seeking views 
safe limits set by the Health and Safety 
from stakeholders on the future of the gas 
Executive and changes to gas quality 
system, with a focus on infrastructure and 
and infrastructure must meet all safety 
markets. This will enable us to determine how 
requirements;
the gas market will need to evolve to ensure 
•  Operability. Changes to gas quality and  the right market and regulatory signals are in 
infrastructure must maintain existing  place to offer the necessary level of investment 
system, pipeline, and consumer appliance  and maintenance throughout the transition. 
operability; Gathering evidence on the amount of natural 
•  Security of Supply. Blending must not  gas, biomethane, and hydrogen available and 
prevent consumers’ secure gas supply;  the ongoing role for gas will inform what action 
we must take.
•  Affordability. Costs to consumers should 
be affordable and value for money; and 32. Downstream, UK refineries already 
•  Temporary. Blending could support initial  underpin major CCUS and hydrogen projects 
development of the hydrogen economy but  in key industrial clusters. These include 
is not a preferred long-term solution. Gigastack (Phillips 66), Humber Zero (Phillips 
66) and HyNet (Essar Oil UK). The Industrial 
Energy Transformation Fund recently awarded 
£7 million and £800,000 to Essar Stanlow 
and Phillips 66 respectively, in support of 
hydrogen focussed net zero projects. We are 
also encouraged to see operators investing 
in the production of low carbon fuels and will 
continue to work with the sector to encourage 
innovation, maximise economic opportunities 
from net zero, and remove regulatory barriers 
which hinder the transition away from 
fossil fuels. 
Case study: Fulcrum BioEnergy 
Fulcrum BioEnergy has announced plans to develop its first UK residual waste 
to low carbon SAF plant. The ‘Fulcrum NorthPoint’ biorefinery will be located at 
the Essar Oil (UK) Limited refinery at Stanlow, Ellesmere Port in the North West 
of England.
33. We have also published the draft  secure fuel supplies are maintained during the 
Downstream Oil Resilience Bill which will give  transition to net zero.
the government the powers it needs to ensure 
114Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Low carbon fuel supply 38. To accelerate the development of UK 
plants to produce advanced fuels we have 
34. The UK has a unique opportunity to be 
provided grant funding through schemes 
a leader in low carbon fuel production and 
including the Future Fuels for Flight and Freight 
this will be captured in strategies that we will 
Competition (F4C) and Advanced Biofuels 
publish in 2022. 
Demonstration Competition (ABDC). Delivering 
on the Ten Point Plan we also recently 
35. A new Biomass Strategy will set how 
announced the shortlist for the £15 million 
sustainable biomass could be best used 
Green Fuels, Green Skies Competition (GFGS) 
across the economy to help achieve net 
supporting eight companies pioneering 
zero, including to produce low carbon fuels. 
new SAF technologies. To accompany this 
It will also assess our existing sustainability 
announcement, we published a consultation 
standards, already some of the world’s most 
on proposals for a new UK SAF blending 
stringent, and set out where and how we can 
mandate aiming for introduction in 2025. 
improve them further. When coupled with 
It included design questions on which 
carbon capture and storage, it is possible 
feedstocks and technologies should be 
that sustainable biomass can not only enable 
eligible and welcomed views on what our 
production of low carbon fuels but could also 
SAF ambition and targets should be. We are 
deliver vital negative emissions. Any future 
currently reviewing the responses to the SAF 
BECCS project will need to meet stringent 
mandate consultation, but our ambition is for 
sustainability requirements for the production 
a comprehensive policy framework, including 
and use of biomass, as will be set out in the 
the mandate, to enable the delivery of 10% 
Biomass Strategy. 
SAF by 2030. Further detail can be found in 
36. This will be complemented by a long-term  the Transport chapter.
strategy for low carbon fuels as announced 
Hydrogen production
in our recent Transport Decarbonisation Plan. 
The strategy will consider how to maximise 
39. The UK’s skills, capabilities, assets, and 
emissions savings from low carbon fuels 
infrastructure mean that we have the potential 
used across different transport modes in the 
to excel in both CCUS-enabled and electrolytic 
period to 2050. 
low carbon hydrogen production. Alongside 
37. The latter of the two strategies will build  the scale of production that CCUS-enabled 
on the success of the Renewable Transport  methane reformation or ‘blue’ hydrogen can 
Fuel Obligation (RTFO), which has supported  bring, our renewables can support the growth 
the market for low carbon fuel supply since  of electrolytic or ‘green’ hydrogen, bringing 
2008. Fuels supported under the RTFO  down costs and increasing production 
need to comply with sustainability criteria  capacity whilst new production technologies 
such as minimum GHG thresholds, and by  such as hydrogen from nuclear and biomass 
incentivising fuels produced from wastes, it  are developed. Supporting a variety of different 
saved 5.37 MtCO e in 2019 alone. Further to  production methods will enable us to develop 
2
sub-targets for so-called development fuels  low carbon hydrogen rapidly at scale during 
of strategic importance, we have recently  the 2020s and 2030s to deliver what is 
widened support to more diverse fuels and  needed for CB6 and net zero.
announced more ambitious targets for the 
RTFO to 2032 set at 14.6% of total liquid 
fuel supply.
115Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
40. Our approach to scaling up the UK  43. In August this year we published our 
hydrogen economy in the 2020s is set out  consultation on our preferred hydrogen 
in our recent UK Hydrogen Strategy, which  business model25 to provide revenue support 
describes our key policies and proposals  to hydrogen producers and help overcome 
to overcome key barriers to development.  the cost challenge to bring through investment 
Alongside the Strategy, we published a  in new low carbon hydrogen projects. As set 
package of documents consulting on  out in the Industry chapter, and Hydrogen 
proposed policy support mechanisms for new  Revenue Support (IDHRS) scheme to fund our 
hydrogen production. This approach, subject  new hydrogen and industrial carbon capture 
to further policy development following these  business models. We will be providing up to 
consultations, and together with the ambition  £140 million to establish the scheme, including 
shown by proposed hydrogen projects,  up to £100 million to award contracts of up to 
provides confidence we can achieve low  250 MW of electrolytic hydrogen production 
carbon production sufficient to deliver on our  capacity in 2023 with further allocation in 
targets under the Climate Change Act. We  2024. The IDHRS will fund the allocation of the 
know there will be more to do and will keep  hydrogen business model contracts to both 
our policy approach under review as the use  electrolytic and CCUS-enabled projects from 
of hydrogen in the energy system develops  2023, resulting in up to 1.5 GW of low carbon 
and production methods evolve. hydrogen contracts awarded to projects.
41. The UK is already at the forefront of  44. As set out in the August consultation,26 
innovation across the hydrogen value chain,  our Net Zero Hydrogen Fund (NZHF) will 
reducing technological barriers to production  provide up to £240 million for government 
and end use cases. We recently launched  co-investment to support new low carbon 
a new £60 million Low Carbon Hydrogen  hydrogen production out to 2025. The aim of 
Supply 2 Competition, which will develop  the Fund is to support commercial deployment 
novel hydrogen supply solutions for a growing  of new low carbon hydrogen production 
hydrogen economy.24 projects during the early 2020s, by helping 
to address barriers related to commercial 
42. Low carbon hydrogen is not yet 
risk and high upfront costs relative to fossil 
competitive with traditional fuels as production 
fuel alternatives, unlocking private sector 
projects face additional costs compared to 
investment in projects. We intend to launch 
existing energy sources. Investors cannot 
the NZHF in early 2022.
currently justify upfront capital investments 
without visibility or predictability of revenue  45. In August we also published a 
and returns. Lessons learnt from the success  consultation27 on the proposed UK low carbon 
of UK offshore wind deployment suggests  hydrogen standard which will define what is 
government intervention to address this  meant by low carbon hydrogen, allowing us 
cost difference is a key requirement to bring  to incentivise and support the right production 
forward hydrogen supply at scale.  for supply across the energy system. It will 
establish a threshold for greenhouse gas 
emissions allowed in the production process 
for hydrogen to be considered low carbon and 
be eligible for support.
116Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
46. The RTFO has supported the supply  47. The UK Hydrogen Strategy sets out the 
of renewable hydrogen into transport since  initial steps being undertaken to develop the 
2018 and has been successful in launching  hydrogen economy over the 2020s, to deliver 
small-scale renewable hydrogen supply. In  our 2030 5 GW production capacity ambition 
July, the Department for Transport announced  and position the hydrogen economy for further 
changes to the RTFO which could further  ramp up needed to support CB6 and net 
encourage the uptake of renewable hydrogen  zero. But we know there will be more to do 
in transport, including in rail and shipping. The  beyond this. That is why we committed in the 
original consultation, published in March, also  strategy to say more on the mix of production 
proposed to make evidencing the provision of  technologies and supporting network and 
renewable electricity for hydrogen production  storage infrastructure that could help meet 
easier through power purchase agreements  future hydrogen demand following conclusion 
and recognising the importance of regional  of our consultations and further work. Similarly, 
grids. The final decision on these changes will  we set out our plans to develop appropriate 
be published shortly.  regulatory and market frameworks to support 
an expanding hydrogen economy throughout 
the 2020s and beyond. We will publish a 
Hydrogen Sector Development Action plan in 
early 2022.
117Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Working together across the UK 
Examples of policy action by the Scottish Government, Welsh Government 
and Northern Ireland Executive 
UK Government is working across all  Scotland 
levels of government and with Devolved 
In December 2020, the Scottish Government 
Administrations to ensure consistent action to 
published a Hydrogen Policy Statement which 
reduce emissions across the fuel supply and 
sets a vision for Scotland to become a leading 
hydrogen sectors, and across the UK.
Hydrogen Nation with an ambition to generate 
Wales  5 GW of renewable and low-carbon hydrogen 
by 2030, committing to £100 million funding to 
In December 2020 the Welsh Government 
accelerate the hydrogen economy in Scotland 
commissioned a report on hydrogen that 
over the next five years.
included baseline reporting on related activities 
and expertise, and a pathway for developing  The Hydrogen Policy Statement has provided 
the sector.28 The proposed pathway contains  the framework for the development of a 
ten objectives covering both supply and use  Hydrogen Action Plan in 2021 which will 
of hydrogen, including the establishment of at  provide further detail on the planned approach 
least one 10+ MW renewable production site  and necessary actions to implement the policy 
and the deployment of 200 fuel cell buses.  positions outlined in the Policy Statement. 
The Welsh Government consulted on the  The Hydrogen Action Plan will be published 
pathway earlier this year and following analysis  later this year.
of the responses it will finalise a pathway for 
The Scottish Government has led the way 
hydrogen development over the second Welsh 
in supporting world-leading hydrogen 
carbon budget period (2021-25).
demonstration projects in Scotland that are 
helping to determine the role of hydrogen 
in Scotland’s future energy system. This 
includes the provision of £7 million funded 
support towards the cost of a world first 
£28 million demonstration of an end-to-end 
100% hydrogen energy system. The project 
will construct and operate a hydrogen 
heat network system in Fife able to service 
around 300 houses and will be of UK-wide 
significance to evidence the role that hydrogen 
can play in decarbonising heat, using the 
gas network. 
118Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Northern Ireland
A new Northern Ireland Energy Strategy is 
expected to be published by the end of 2021, 
with proposals on phasing out coal, solid fuels 
and heating oil alongside decarbonising our 
gas network, including the future injection of 
biomethane and potential hydrogen blending.
Northern Ireland is uniquely positioned to 
become a leader in the hydrogen economy 
and secure these benefits locally. This 
is already gathering momentum, with NI 
Water trialling an innovative new hydrogen 
electrolyser at its wastewater treatment works 
– the first such project of its kind across the 
UK. Translink, the public transport service 
provider in Northern Ireland, is also introducing 
three new hydrogen buses to its fleet and 
is procuring a new hydrogen fuelling station 
for these and an anticipated 20 more under 
a new contract. The GenComm project,  
led by Belfast Metropolitan College, will 
trial  hydrogen production via electrolysis for 
hydrogen buses. They are also engaged with 
a range of potential complementary projects to 
build on this momentum and contribute to the 
growth of an indigenous hydrogen economy in 
Northern Ireland.
119Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
3iii. Industry
Stretching our ambition for net zero 
Our Key Commitments
•  Ambition to deliver 6 MtCO  per year of industrial CCUS by 2030, and 9 MtCO  per 
2 2
year by 2035.
•  Set up the Industrial Decarbonisation and Hydrogen Revenue Support (IDHRS) 
scheme to fund our new industrial carbon capture and hydrogen business models.
•  Support the deployment of CCUS through the £1 billion CCS Infrastructure Fund.
•  Following Phase 1 of the Cluster Sequencing process, the Hynet and East Coast 
Clusters have been confirmed as Track 1 clusters.
•  Support the installation of energy efficiency and on-site decarbonisation measures 
through the £315 million Industrial Energy Transformation Fund (IETF) (£289 million 
for England, Wales and Northern Ireland, £26 million for Scotland).
•  Support the increased requirement for fuel switching to low carbon alternatives, with 
an ambition to replace around 50 TWh of fossil fuels per year by 2035.
•  In collaboration with the Steel Council we will consider the implications of the 
recommendation of the Climate Change Committee to set targets for ore-based 
steelmaking to reach near-zero emissions by 2035, and the business environment 
necessary to support the transition.
•  Develop several Resource and Energy Efficiency (REEE) measures with ambition 
of achieving the anticipated requirement of 11 MtCO e worth of savings by 2035, 
2
including up to 3 MtCO e of potential abatement in the Iron and Steel sector.
2
•  Incentivise cost-effective abatement in industry at the pace and scale required to 
deliver net zero, through the UK ETS by consulting (in partnership with the Devolved 
Administrations) on a net zero consistent cap.
•  Explore opportunities for faster decarbonisation of dispersed sites in the 2020s.
120Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Progress to date
1. The UK’s manufacturing and refining sector  6. We plan to have the world’s first net zero 
plays an essential role in society. It contributes  industrial cluster by 2040, awarded grants 
£180 billion to the overall economy,29 directly  from the £315 million Industrial Energy 
accounting for 8% of GDP30 and provides 2.5  Transformation Fund (IETF), announced 
million direct jobs across the country31 as well  a £1 billion Carbon Capture and Storage 
as over 5 million across the value chain.32 Infrastructure Fund, and a £240 million Net 
Zero Hydrogen Fund. Additionally, as part 
2. However, industry33 is also a major source 
of the Industrial Decarbonisation Challenge 
of CO  emissions, producing 15% (78 
2 (IDC), we recently announced £171 million 
MtCO e)34 of the UK’s current total. Around 
2 of funding, matched by over £200 million 
half of industrial emissions are concentrated 
industry investment, for nine projects within 
in specific clusters – geographical areas with 
five clusters.
large concentrations of industry.
7. Growing new industries in low carbon 
3. Industry emissions have more than halved 
hydrogen alongside CCUS and renewable 
since 1990, due mainly to the changing 
energy will put our industrial ‘SuperPlaces’ at 
structure of the UK’s manufacturing sector, 
the forefront of technological development. 
improved energy efficiency, and a shift to 
Together this will develop resilient supply 
low carbon fuels. Despite this progress, the 
chains, support jobs, and position UK 
overall pace of reductions is slowing, and 
companies at the forefront of an exciting 
more action is needed to achieve our net zero 
growing global market, as well supporting 
commitments.
industrial processes, industrial heat, power, 
4. The Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy  shipping and trucking to make the shift 
(IDS), published in March 2021, was the first  to net zero.
of its kind in a major economy. It sets out 
8. Energy intensive industry in the UK has 
how industry can decarbonise in line with net 
been covered by a cap-and-trade policy since 
zero while transforming industrial regions by 
2005. The UK government and Devolved 
attracting inward investment, future-proofing 
Administrations successfully launched the UK 
businesses, and securing the long-term 
Emissions Trading Scheme (UK ETS) on 1 
viability of jobs.
January 2021. The UK ETS cap, which sets 
5. This followed previous work including  the limit on emissions for sectors covered by 
the landmark Industrial Decarbonisation  it, will be aligned with a net zero consistent 
and Energy Efficiency Roadmaps to 2050,  trajectory by January 2023, or January 2024 
published in 2015, which set out a series  at the latest. In the coming months, we will be 
of pathways for emissions reductions for  publishing a consultation on the level of the 
energy-intensive sectors. cap and other elements of UK ETS evolution.
121Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
9. We recognise the importance of  of our current carbon leakage mitigation 
addressing the risk of carbon leakage so  policy of free allowances under the UK ETS. 
policy interventions do not lead to increased  Government will continue to explore options 
emissions elsewhere, and to ensure that  to mitigate carbon leakage, with emphasis 
UK industry has the confidence needed to  on an international, multilateral effort to tackle 
fully decarbonise. The IDS and the Net Zero  carbon leakage at source through global 
Review set out the potential options available  action on industrial decarbonisation and 
to address this, including regulatory standards  climate regulation, with continued monitoring 
and Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanisms  of related global policy developments.
(CBAMs), as well as the ongoing review 
Net zero transition and economic opportunities 
Our 2050 vision and how we  11. Based on our whole system modelling, 
by 2050, emissions associated with industry 
get there 
could need to drop by 87-96% compared to 
10. To stay on track for net zero, industrial  2019, down to 3-10 MtCO e. In the interim, to 
2
emissions will need to fall significantly, with  meet our NDC and Carbon Budget 6 targets, 
residual emissions being compensated for  we expect emissions could fall by 43-53% 
by Greenhouse Gas Removal methods. All  by 2030 and 63-76% by 2035, compared to 
industrial sectors will need to act to meet this  2019 levels. These figures are based on an 
challenge and to ensure they are resilient to  indicative industry pathway contributing to the 
climate changes that are already inevitable. To  whole-economy net zero and interim targets 
do this, we need to transform how industry  (see figure 19 below).
uses energy and makes products and rethink 
the type of industrial products consumers buy. 
122Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Figure 19: Indicative industry emissions pathway to 2037
180
160
140
e) 120
2
O
C
t 100
M
(
 
s
n 80
o
si
s
mi 60
E
Pre-IDS & NZS policies 
and proposals
40
2050
20
Range
NZS delivery
pathway
0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Source: BEIS analysis 
12. The IDS sets out the policy foundations  13. Our Carbon Budget 6 delivery pathway 
to deliver net zero for industry, including  aims to give long-term clarity to industry, going 
immediate actions in the 2020s. The initial  further than the IDS in several areas:
reduction target of around two thirds (67%) 
•  Going further and faster on fuel 
of industrial emissions by 2035 was informed 
switching and carbon capture, 
by sector-specific modelling developed in 
utilisation and storage (CCUS). These 
conjunction with the CCC. Our new ambition 
are critical for our overall pathway, requiring 
of 63-76% is consistent with, and builds on, 
both infrastructure decisions and revenue 
the pathways we set out in the IDS, but with, 
support, via the IDHRS scheme. Modelling 
amongst other things, increased levels of fuel 
suggests fuel switching to low carbon 
switching and iron and steel decarbonising in 
alternatives could reach 50 Twh per 
the 2020s and early 2030s. 
year by 2035, along with an increase in 
capturing and storing industrial emissions, 
from 3 MtCO  per year to 6 MtCO  by 
2 2
2030, and 9 MtCO  per year by 2035. 
2
123Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
•  Working towards  more resource and  16. Many industrial sectors also have low 
energy efficiency savings. We anticipate  profit margins, so their ability to invest in 
the need for regulatory, fiscal, and wider  some decarbonisation technologies is limited 
measures targeted at industrial products  and has been exacerbated by the pandemic. 
and supply chains to achieve 11 MtCO e  Short-to-medium term capital funding and 
2
worth of savings by 2035, including up to  revenue support will therefore be required to 
3 MtCO e of potential abatement in the  overcome these investment hurdles, reduce 
2
iron and steel sector, as estimated by the  the risk of carbon leakage, and stimulate long 
Climate Change Committee.  term private investment. 
•  Realising the benefits of demand-
17. Decarbonising the industry sector will 
side measures and carbon pricing. 
regenerate communities and open up new 
An increasing carbon price will help to 
employment opportunities right around the 
incentivise action on decarbonisation by 
UK. Based on current estimates, policies and 
industry, whilst demand side measures, 
proposals to reduce emissions in the industry 
such as product labelling, regulatory 
sector could support up to 54,000 jobs in 
standards, and changes to public and 
2030. This figure is driven by CCUS, which 
private procurement approaches, can 
could support up to 50,000 jobs in 203035, 
play a key role in helping the development 
split across industry, power, and the transport 
of the market, and mitigating the risk of 
and storage network.36 In addition, the 
carbon leakage.
manufacture and installation of on-site energy 
efficiency and fuel switching measures to 
Seizing new opportunities
achieve a net zero pathway for industry could 
14. To achieve the level of emissions  support up to 4,000 jobs in 2030. 
reductions in the industry sector indicated by 
18. We have the opportunity to future-proof 
our delivery pathway to 2037, we will need 
industrial sectors and take advantage of future 
additional public and private investment of 
low carbon markets. This will include creating 
at least £14 billion and significant operating 
resilient supply chains that ensure we exploit 
expenditure from the expected increase in 
our strengths and have diverse supply sources 
CCUS, hydrogen use and other fuel switching 
for critical goods, as well as supporting those 
technology. Energy and resource efficiency 
areas that could be vulnerable to global 
will also play a key role in offsetting some of 
shocks. The UK is already a world leader in 
these costs. 
new clean technology, as seen in our growing 
15. Due to challenges faced by industry, such  hydrogen and CCUS sectors, and we can 
as the level of capital investment required  develop new markets for low carbon goods 
to commercially scale essential low carbon  and support further innovation. As highlighted 
technologies, it will be important to drive the  in the IDS, wider environmental and air quality 
decarbonisation of industry at a pace that  impacts will be kept under consideration, in 
allows technology to develop and companies,  line with evolving regulatory standards.
large and small, to adapt their working 
practices, and retrain their workforces. 
124Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
19. CCUS will be critical to achieving net  gas sector will be able to make use of local 
zero, alongside low carbon alternatives such  skills programmes such as Skills Bootcamps 
as low carbon hydrogen and electricity.  or Free Courses for Jobs to support new 
These technologies offer a renewed era for  emerging industries in renewables, CCUS, 
our industrial heartlands. Connecting locally,  and low carbon hydrogen to help build 
for instance positioning hydrogen train trials  SuperPlaces. As the demand pulls through 
near blue hydrogen clusters means we can  these lower carbon technologies, the 
start to bring higher skilled, higher paid jobs  costs fall. And these industrial clusters, our 
and expertise to cluster in these area. The  potential ‘SuperPlaces’, will foster and lead 
engineers, fabricators, and geologists currently  internationally on the development and roll out 
working in industrial clusters and the oil and  of these technologies.
Policies and proposals
Fuel switching and carbon capture 22. The UK Hydrogen Strategy indicated 
that in 2030 consumption of low carbon 
Low carbon hydrogen hydrogen as an industry fuel could range from 
around 10 TWh per year if supply is limited to 
20. Fuel switching to hydrogen is likely to 
clusters, and up to around 20 TWh per year 
be technically feasible for most industrial 
if pipelines are connected to some dispersed 
processes and our modelling indicates it is 
sites. While supply is likely to come mostly 
the least-cost option to decarbonise harder to 
from large scale cluster-based CCUS-enabled 
electrify sites, processes, and sectors.
hydrogen production sites, there could also 
21. The IDS sets out that a low regret level  be industrial demand for low carbon hydrogen 
of deep decarbonisation infrastructure  from electrolysis, which can be produced at 
should be installed in industrial clusters this  a smaller scale on a more localised level. To 
decade. This will give industry the confidence  stay on track for our Carbon Budget 6 delivery 
to invest in switching to low carbon fuels,  pathway, hydrogen demand from industry 
such as hydrogen. Industrial users located in  may need to increase up to 50 TWh by 2035. 
clusters are therefore expected to provide the  This increase would be driven by a growing 
most significant new demand for hydrogen  number of sites having access to low carbon 
by 2030, with the greatest potential from  hydrogen, further technology development 
chemicals and iron and steel sectors. A  to enable an expanding range of processes 
significant proportion of this demand could  to switch to hydrogen, and a shift in the 
arise from a small number of sites acting as  associated costs, such as the price of carbon, 
‘pathfinders’, proving the viability of hydrogen  to make hydrogen an increasingly competitive 
at a commercial scale and fostering the initial  fuel option.
market for low carbon hydrogen. 
23. The UK Hydrogen Strategy also set out 
the actions we are taking to support industry 
to realise the potential of this new technology. 
It is critical that we demonstrate fuel switching 
to low carbon hydrogen on industrial sites 
during the 2020s so we will provide further 
support for research and innovation through 
the Net Zero Innovation Portfolio and initiatives 
led by the Industrial Decarbonisation Research 
and Innovation Centre (IDRIC).
125Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
24. Demand-side measures and carbon  26. Developed alongside hydrogen, CCUS 
pricing could help to drive demand for  will be part of creating transformative 
hydrogen and will be supported by grant  “SuperPlaces” in areas such The Humber 
funding, such as the £55 million Industrial  and North East, North West, and Southern 
Fuel Switching Competition under our Net  England as well as in Scotland and Wales. Our 
Zero Innovation Portfolio and the Phase 2  £1 billion CCS Infrastructure Fund will provide 
of the IETF, to support on-site fuel switches.  industry with the certainty required to deploy 
Regulatory measures can also support  CCUS at pace and at scale and will form part 
industry to switch to low carbon hydrogen,  of a package of government support, which 
with the Hydrogen Strategy announcing calls  will also include the Industrial Decarbonisation 
for evidence on hydrogen-ready industrial  and Hydrogen Revenue Support (IDHRS) 
equipment and decarbonising existing high  scheme and the £240 million Net Zero 
carbon hydrogen production. Alongside  Hydrogen Fund supporting both CCS-enabled 
this, hydrogen production measures in the  ‘blue’ and electrolytic ‘green’ hydrogen.
fuel supply chapter of this strategy will bring 
27. Following the completion of Phase 1 of 
forward low carbon hydrogen supply for use 
the Cluster Sequencing process, the Hynet 
across the economy and help make hydrogen 
and East Coast Clusters have been confirmed 
a price competitive decarbonisation option to 
as track 1 clusters for the mid-2020s and will 
encourage end users to switch.
be taken forward into Track-1 negotiations. 
Carbon capture, usage and  If the clusters represent value for money 
for the consumer and the taxpayer then 
storage (CCUS) 
subject to final decisions of Ministers, they 
25. Carbon Capture, Usage & Storage  will receive support under the government’s 
(CCUS) will be an exciting new industry to  CCUS Programme. We are also announcing 
capture the carbon we continue to emit and  the Scottish Cluster as a reserve cluster if a 
revitalise the birthplaces of the first Industrial  back-up is needed; we will continue to engage 
Revolution. The Prime Minister’s Ten Point  with this cluster as well as the track 1 clusters, 
Plan established a commitment to deploy  throughout the next stage of the process. This 
CCUS in a minimum of two industrial clusters  puts these places - Teesside, the Humber, 
by the mid-2020s, and four by 2030 at the  Merseyside, North Wales and the North 
latest. Our aim is to use CCUS technology  East of Scotland - among the potential early 
to capture and store 20-30MtCO2 per year  SuperPlaces which will be transformed over 
by 2030, forming the foundations for future  the next decade.
investment and potential export opportunities. 
28. We remain committed to helping all 
Developed alongside hydrogen, we can 
industrial clusters to decarbonise as we work 
create these transformative ‘SuperPlaces’ in 
to reach net zero emissions by 2050, and we 
areas such as the Humber, North East, North 
are clear that CCUS will continue to play a 
West and southern England, as well as in 
key role in this process.  Consequently, the 
Scotland and Wales.
government continues to be committed to 
Track-2 contributing capacity of 10Mt per year 
to help achieve our 2030 ambition. Deploying 
CCUS will be a significant undertaking, these 
are new major infrastructure projects for a new 
sector of the economy and carry with them 
significant risks to deliver by the mid-2020s. 
126Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Government will need to play a role in  31. The IDS set out the ambition to capture 3 
providing long-term certainty to these projects  MtCO  per year by 2030. Our delivery pathway 
2
to manage these risks and bring forward the  for Carbon Budget 6 requires an increased 
UK’s first CCUS clusters. ambition of 6 MtCO  per year by 2030 and 9 
2
MtCO  per year by 2035. We envisage these 
29. CCUS will be critical to achieving net  2
emissions to be captured from industries in 
zero, alongside low carbon alternatives such 
clusters as well as from more dispersed sites, 
as low carbon hydrogen and electricity. 
where non-pipeline transport solutions such as 
These technologies offer a renewed era for 
the shipping of CO  may be required. 
our industrial heartlands. Connecting locally,  2
for instance positioning hydrogen train  Revenue support for industrial carbon 
trials  near blue hydrogen clusters  means 
capture and hydrogen production
we start to bring higher skilled, higher paid 
jobs and expertise to cluster in these areas.  32. CCUS and hydrogen deployment will 
The engineers, fabricators and geologists  play a central role in our green industrial 
currently working in industrial clusters and the  revolution and ensuring that the UK’s 
oil and gas sector will be able to make use of  businesses are competitive in a net zero 
skills programmes such as Skills Bootcamps  future. We have been working with industry 
and Free Courses for Jobs to support new  to develop business models for industrial 
emerging industries in renewables, CCUS  carbon capture and hydrogen production 
and low carbon hydrogen to help build  to give investors the long-term revenue 
SuperPlaces. As the demand pulls through  certainty they require. We are now setting up 
these lower carbon technologies, the costs  the Industrial Decarbonisation and Hydrogen 
fall. And these industrial clusters, our potential  Revenue Support (IDHRS) scheme to fund 
SuperPlaces, foster and lead internationally  these business models and enable the first 
on the development and roll out of these  commercial scale deployment of low carbon 
technologies.  hydrogen and industrial carbon capture. 
This will unlock by 2030 up to £6bn private 
30. Industrial CCUS is fundamental to 
sector capital, create thousands of jobs in 
decarbonising of industries such as chemicals, 
key levelling up regions, grow the UK supply 
oil refining, and cement. This is because 
chain and achieve cost reductions, and deliver 
options for decarbonising industry are limited 
carbon savings to allow us to stay on track for 
and fuel switching is sometimes only a partial 
our carbon budgets.
solution. CCUS is not currently investable for 
most industrial sectors as deployment costs  33. The IDHRS scheme will initially commit 
are higher than the current carbon price can  to providing up to £100 million to support 
support, and businesses are unable to pass  initial electrolytic hydrogen projects, as set 
these through to consumers. Additionally,  out in the Fuel Supply chapter. We will also 
businesses may face challenges raising capital  be announcing a funding envelope in 2022 
finance to invest in CCUS until it has been  that will enable us to award the first contacts 
more widely deployed in the UK. Therefore,  to industrial carbon capture facilities and 
an investable business model is needed,  CCUS-enabled hydrogen production projects 
alongside clear commitments to provide  from 2023 through the Cluster Sequencing 
certainty to industry. process, to deliver up to 3 MtCO2/yr of 
industrial carbon capture and up to 1GW of 
CCUS-enabled hydrogen by the mid-2020s.
127Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
34. Subject to costs falling, we are also  higher temperature processes are currently 
committing to further allocation rounds for  limited due to the low maturity of technologies. 
all types of eligible low carbon hydrogen  We are currently assessing these barriers and 
production and industrial carbon capture from  will set out initial steps that we will take to 
2025. We will announce further allocation  support the uptake of electrification by the end 
rounds in due course which will enable us  of 2021. Some initial grant funding support 
to meet our 2030 deployment ambitions of  will be available via Phase 2 of the IETF from 
6MtCO2/year of industrial carbon capture, 5  Autumn 2021. We are also working with 
GW hydrogen production capacity, and four  Ofgem, network operators, and stakeholders 
CCUS clusters, while continuing to grow the  on the approach to delivering low carbon 
UK supply chain and achieve cost reductions.  electricity networks with the capacity to meet 
Once established, this framework could  increased demand from industry.
also be used in the future for other critical 
Biomass
decarbonisation technologies.
38. Initial support for sustainable use of 
35. From 2025 at the latest, all revenue 
biomass fuel switching and BECCS is available 
support for hydrogen production will be levy 
via Phase 2 of IETF. As set out in the IDS, 
funded, subject to consultation and legislation 
current evidence strongly suggests that given 
being in place. Further details on this will be 
limited sustainable biomass supply, we may 
set out in 2022 through the Government’s 
need to prioritise the use of biomass where 
response to the ongoing Hydrogen Business 
it can be combined with carbon capture 
Model consultation. This will include parallel 
and storage (BECCS), resulting in negative 
work to ensure fairness and affordability, such 
emissions. The Biomass Strategy, due to be 
as exemptions for energy intensive industries 
published in 2022 will review the amount of 
at risk of carbon leakage.
sustainable biomass available to the UK, how 
Electrification this could be best used across the economy, 
and establish a role for BECCS in reducing 
36. Electrification has the potential to abate 
carbon emissions across the economy.
between 5 MtCO e and 12 MtCO e of industry 
2 2
emissions per year by 2050. Electrification  Industrial non-road mobile 
will play a more significant role (12 MtCO e) if 
machinery (NRMM)
2
hydrogen is unavailable in dispersed sites. This 
equates to an increase demand of electricity  39. NRMM covers a wide variety of machinery 
by 15-44 TWh. Additional electricity demand  across the economy (e.g. diggers, combine 
is consistent under our delivery pathway for  harvesters, generators, cranes), with total 
Carbon Budget 6, albeit the demand comes at  emissions of around 12 MtCO e per year. 
2
a faster pace due to the possible adoption of  Industrial NRMM accounts for around 6 
electrification in the iron and steel sector.  MtCO e,37 coming from construction, mining, 
2
and manufacturing, with the remaining 
37. Electrification technologies for low 
emissions largely attributed to agriculture 
temperature processes are technologically 
(see Natural Resources chapter), and some 
mature and could be applied to less energy 
to buildings and transport. New technologies 
intensive sites today. However, industry 
have begun to penetrate markets for some 
faces barriers to adoption such as high 
NRMM uses, for example electrification 
electricity costs. We have seen the impact 
technologies, particularly for small, light 
of overreliance on gas pushing up prices for 
duty equipment. Government intervention is 
hardworking people but our plan to expand 
our domestic renewables will push down 
electricity wholesale prices. Applications for 
128Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
likely to be necessary to ensure low carbon  44. Steel accounts for 14% of industry 
technologies continue to be developed and  emissions,39 with 95% of this coming from 
ensure uptake at the level needed to reach  two blast furnace sites, Scunthorpe, and Port 
carbon budgets and net zero.  Talbot.40 Decarbonising these sites and the 
wider steel sector through switching to Electric 
40. The first stage in government support will 
Arc Furnace applying industrial carbon capture 
involve innovation funding to prepare key low 
technology to existing blast furnaces or in the 
carbon technologies for commercialisation. 
future using hydrogen-based DRI.
The £40 million Red Diesel Replacement 
competition will provide grant funding to  45. The UK recognises the importance of 
develop and demonstrate low carbon  coordinating international activity on steel 
alternatives to red diesel for the construction  sector decarbonisation, to reduce the costs 
and mining and quarrying sectors, to help  and risks of unilateral action. This includes 
these sectors to decarbonise. working with international partners to 
collaborate on measures to mitigate carbon 
41. Further cross government work is required 
leakage, increase the effectiveness of R&D 
to develop policies to support the deployment 
spending, and create larger, international 
of technological solutions and required 
markets for low emission steel products.  The 
infrastructure in specific sectors, including 
UK is taking a leading role in driving forward 
agriculture, transport and buildings. Relevant 
this activity, championing a number of key 
government departments will work together to 
initiatives in this area at COP26, and beyond. 
ensure a coherent approach. 
This includes the Clean Energy Ministerial’s 
Industrial Deep Decarbonisation Initiative, 
Steel
which the UK co-leads with India. This focuses 
42. UK steel plays a critical role in the  on aligning approaches to data measurement, 
economy as a foundation industry supporting  standards and procurement, to ensure there 
local economic growth and our levelling-up  is a coordinated approach to market creation 
agenda. Steel employs around 32,500 people  across borders. We are also supporting the 
and supports up to a further 40,000 jobs  Net Zero Industry Mission, under Mission 
through its supply chains, providing high  Innovation, which aims to foster deeper 
value employment in economically deprived  collaboration on industry decarbonisation.
areas.38 The IDS contains commitments 
Resource efficiency and energy 
to work with the newly constituted Steel 
Council to consider the implications of the  efficiency (REEE)
recommendation of the Climate Change 
46. The Climate Change Committee estimate 
Committee to ‘set targets for ore-based 
that REEE measures could contribute 11 
steelmaking to reach near-zero emissions 
MtCO e of annual emissions reductions by 
by 2035’. Hydrogen-based steelmaking,  2
2035.41 Various policies exist to incentivise 
CCUS and electrification are some of the 
and regulate action on REEE, but we need 
technological approaches being considered as 
to ensure the right frameworks are in place 
part of this process. 
to end clear investment signals and drive 
43. The Steel Council offers the forum for  rapid action. 
government, industry, and trade unions 
to work in partnership on the shared 
objective of creating an achievable, long-
term plan to support the sector’s transition 
to a competitive, sustainable, and low 
carbon future.
129Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Resource efficiency 50. Government aims to support action 
in the construction sector by improving 
47. Resource efficiency and material 
reporting on embodied carbon in buildings 
substitution measures could save 9 MtCO e 
and infrastructure with a view to exploring 
2
per annum in industry within the UK by 
a maximum level for new builds in the 
2050.42 Resource efficiency measures 
future. We recognise there is potential to 
reduce emissions from industrial processes 
reduce embodied carbon by way of material 
by keeping products and materials in 
substitution where appropriate, such as in 
circulation for longer by way of reuse, repair, 
timber usage (see Natural Resources, Waste 
remanufacture and recycling as well as 
and F-gases chapter) and resource efficiency 
reducing material usage. These activities 
approaches, amongst others. We have also 
enable the retention of value, and in some 
supported the Green Construction Board 
cases the creation of new value for both the 
to produce a Routemap to Zero Avoidable 
producer and customer, at a much-reduced 
Waste, published in July 2021.
environmental impact.
51. Government is identifying opportunities 
48. The approach in driving the transition to a 
to reduce the substantial embodied carbon 
more resource efficient economy is set out for 
footprint of the automotive sector, beyond the 
England in the Government’s 2018 Resources 
reduction and then elimination of emissions at 
and Waste Strategy, to be supplemented 
the tailpipe.
by a new Waste Prevention Programme, 
which outlines how we will maximise the  52. We are building on the successful 
value of our resources and minimise waste  introduction this year of the first wave of right 
to increase the circularity of our economy.  to repair measures for certain appliances and 
We will formalise joint working arrangements  equipment. Alongside the review of Waste 
across government departments to  from Electrical and Electronic Equipment 
promote collaboration on resource efficiency  (WEEE), we will explore the use of labels that 
approaches, ensuring we are using all the  inform consumers of durability, repairability and 
policy tools available in working towards  recyclability. Other options under consideration 
shared emissions and environmental targets. include enhancing and extending producer 
responsibility schemes to incentivise sharing 
49. The Climate Change Committee (CCC) 
and renting. 
balanced pathway estimates that 3 MtCO e 
2
of potential savings per year could be driven  53. To realise the wider emissions saving 
by consumer-side measures by 2035.  potential of resource efficiency measures 
Government aims to support this shift in the  will require establishing frameworks which 
2020s through policy measures that inform  minimise virgin resource use and maximise 
consumers of the embodied carbon of  recycled, reused, or remanufactured content. 
industrial goods and empower them to make  We will continue to assess all, fiscal and 
choices that support more efficient use of  non-fiscal, policy options to meet these 
resources. Measures across different sectors  objectives.
will be explored, but opportunities have been 
54. Knowledge can be a barrier preventing 
identified in the construction, automotive and 
the value in waste resources from being 
electronics sectors. 
realised, including the sharing of secondary 
resources across different industrial processes. 
We will support companies to identify these 
Industrial Symbiosis opportunities through 
facilitation of a cross sector network to boost 
take-up of circular economy initiatives. We will 
130Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
support inter-disciplinary approaches and  to respond to these barriers. Building on 
strengthen the evidence base on resource  behavioural insights approaches in other 
efficiency initiatives by collaborating with the  areas of government policy, we are keen to 
UKRI funded National Interdisciplinary Circular  explore how local networks – such as growth 
Economy Research (NICER) programme, and  hubs, Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs), 
through the development of data systems to  the local net zero hubs, and chambers of 
connect energy, waste, and water flows from  commerce – can be used to drive energy-
industrial sites. efficient behaviours amongst businesses. 
We will consider which levers could work 
Energy efficiency
best to support, interconnect and scale-up 
these networks.
55. Energy efficiency measures in industry 
range from simple, bill-saving measures to 
59. Funding for complex industrial retrofits 
complex retrofits of industrial equipment with 
with high payback periods will remain 
long payback periods and replacement cycles. 
available via the IETF Phase 2 from Autumn 
We intend to explore regulatory measures to 
2021. These would be further supported by 
drive greater, earlier uptake of energy efficiency 
any future extension to the IETF, reflecting 
measures in line with Carbon Budget targets, 
the government’s manifesto commitment 
supported by a wider package of policies to 
to increase funding to £500 million to 2028. 
enable a smooth industry transition. We intend 
Work will be undertaken to ensure sustainable 
to consult on the development of a package 
financing measures are available long-term.
of measures.
Demand-side measures 
56. The heterogeneity of manufacturing 
industry means that processes are very varied,  60. The IDS sets out our ambition to create 
so codifying them for regulation across the  demand for low carbon products, growing 
whole sector may be challenging. We are  the associated market and supporting 
currently exploring potential new regulatory  industry to share the costs of decarbonisation 
options to address this challenge. This  with consumers. 
includes consideration of whether Energy 
61. The IDS committed to exploring a range of 
Management Systems can provide a tailored, 
policy options that can support this ambition 
technology-neutral approach, and we would 
including improved transparency of embodied 
seek to minimise burdens imposed by 
emissions data, product labelling, regulatory 
regulation, possibly by using digital tools.
standards, and agreeing public and private 
57. Energy intensive industry (EII) firms  procurement approaches. The government 
are already covered by energy efficiency  has committed to developing detailed policy 
regulations and many have adopted  proposals in this area, beginning with a call 
efficiency measures. We are examining how  for evidence on demand-side policy by Spring 
existing schemes can be enhanced (e.g.  2022. The call for evidence will investigate 
reforming Climate Change Agreements) and/ how we can define low carbon products and 
or expanded (e.g. to non-EIIs and SMEs).  the emissions reporting that will be required to 
For non-EIIs and SMEs, we are reviewing  support those definitions. It will also explore 
existing policies to ensure financial support is  the design of demand-side policy levers, with 
accessible and minimum standards are clear.  a view to the potential introduction of voluntary 
standards and labelling as early as 2025, and 
58. For smaller businesses, behaviours 
regulatory standards being introduced in the 
(awareness, prioritisation, maintenance) are 
late 2020s.
often a further barrier to improving energy 
efficiency and we are considering new policies 
131Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
62. Across these approaches, the IDS  66. To achieve this, we intend to advance 
recognises the significant benefits which can  work in the following main areas:
be achieved through international cooperation, 
•  Accelerated decarbonisation across 
and the UK is leading the new Clean Energy 
dispersed sites: We will investigate the 
Ministerial Industrial Deep Decarbonisation 
potential for securing earlier emissions 
Initiative (IDDI), which aims to develop shared 
savings from segments of emissions 
approaches to embodied emissions reporting 
where the technological pathway is more 
and definitions for green steel and cement to 
straightforward, or where economies 
drive public and private procurement. 
of scale can be developed. This could 
Dispersed sites include areas such as heat pumps for low 
temperature processes, and electrification 
63. Dispersed sites43 account for 
of off-gas grid sites.
approximately half of the UK’s industrial 
•  Preparing sites for key infrastructure 
emissions44, and therefore form a major part 
decisions in the mid-2020s: For 
of industry’s pathway to net zero. These sites 
most sites, more clarity on optimal 
are highly diverse in terms of location, sectors, 
decarbonisation options depends on 
and industrial processes, ranging from 
key infrastructure decisions, such as 
energy-intensive processes such as clinker 
the future of hydrogen in the gas grid by 
production in cement to less energy-intensive 
2026. We will work with stakeholders 
processes like pasteurisation in food and drink 
to ensure that these sites understand 
manufacturing. 
their decarbonisation options once these 
64. The IDS indicated that emissions  decisions have been made. This would 
reductions in the early 2020s would focus  include funding for Mini-Cluster Industrial 
on energy efficiency. Deeper decarbonisation  Decarbonisation Plans in the early 2020s, 
potential is expected to be reached in the  to develop shared infrastructure and 
2030s onwards, when uptake of low carbon  intergrated decarbonisation solutions in 
technologies in dispersed sites is expected  local areas. This would be supplemented 
to be rapid.  by continued funding via Phase 2 
of the IETF for site-level studies and 
65. Whilst the broad trajectory on 
deployment.45 
decarbonising dispersed sites remains valid, 
the more ambitious Carbon Budget 6 targets 
mean we will explore opportunities for faster 
decarbonisation in dispersed sites in the 
2020s. Going further on dispersed sites in the 
2020s could help industry avoid technological 
lock-in through offering decarbonisation 
opportunities to align with investment cycles; 
and spread the benefits of green technologies 
beyond the clusters, supporting the 
levelling up agenda.
132Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Working together across the UK 
Examples of policy action by the Scottish Government, Welsh Government, 
and Northern Ireland Executive 
Wales  Scotland
A collaboration between researchers at  The Scottish Government has announced 
Swansea University and cement producer  a major fund to decarbonise industry and 
Hanson UK has seen the installation of a  manufacturing opening opportunities to 
new demonstration unit at the company’s  develop negative emissions technologies 
Regen Ground Granulated Blast Furnace  (NETs). The Scottish Industrial Energy 
Slag (GGBS) plant in Port Talbot. The  Transformation Fund commits £34 million for 
demonstration unit replaces some of the  projects at industrial sites for energy efficiency 
natural gas in the Regen process with green  or deeper decarbonisation, including on 
hydrogen. The carbon footprint of Regen  feasibility and conceptual studies into the 
GGBS is about one tenth of Portland cement  role of NETs.This is supported by a £180 
and it is used as a replacement for up to  million Emerging Energy Technologies fund to 
80% of the cement in concrete. The project  support Hydrogen, CCS and NETs projects.
is part of the £9.2 million Reducing Industrial 
The Scottish Government has also launched 
Carbon Emissions (RICE) project which has 
the Grangemouth Future Industry Board in 
been part-funded by the European Regional 
recognition of the continued commitment to 
Development Fund through the Welsh 
Scotland’s largest industrial manufacturing 
Government.
cluster, now and in our net zero future. 
Supporting a just transition to net zero is 
at the heart of the Board’s work, designing 
the collaborative approach to planning for 
the transition of this core manufacturing 
region and harnessing the significant 
assets, technical and engineering,, skills, 
and significant opportunities presented by 
the cluster.
133Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Northern Ireland •  Resource Efficiency Capital Grant: 
Available to eligible businesses, grants of 
Invest Northern Ireland delivers a suite of 
up to £50,000 to help with the purchase 
support, including specialist advice and 
of new resource efficient technologies that 
investment capital to enable Northern 
reduce the consumption of water, raw 
Irish businesses to become more efficient 
materials and waste produced leading to 
and resilient through green efficiencies. 
reduced carbon emissions.
Support includes:
•  COVID-19 Energy Efficiency Capital 
•  Technical Consultancy: Available to all  Grant: Available to eligible businesses to 
businesses with an annual energy and  build resilience through green efficiency, 
resource spend above £30,000, this  grants of up to £80,000 are available 
support includes fully funded technical  for the installation of energy efficiency 
audits, feasibility studies and advice  equipment that offers cost and carbon 
to help businesses identify cost and  savings through the reduction of energy 
carbon savings. consumption.
•  Resource Matching through Industrial 
Symbiosis: fully funded support that 
offers opportunities to convert redundant 
materials of one business into a resource 
for another business, utilising a circular 
economy approach to add value and to 
reduce costs and carbon for all parties.
134Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
3iv. Heat & Buildings
Decarbonising the way we heat and power our buildings
Our Key Commitments
•  Levelling up through supporting 175,000 green skilled jobs by 2030 and 240,000 by 
2035 – resulting in £6 billion additional GVA by 2030 and with a focus on the areas 
that need investment most.
•  Making the transition to low carbon buildings affordable and achievable for all by:
•  Aiming to phase out the installation of new and replacement natural gas boilers 
by 2035 in line with the natural replacement cycle, and once costs of low carbon 
alternatives have come down, including any hydrogen-ready boilers in areas 
not converting to hydrogen, to ensure that all heating systems used in 2050 are 
compatible with net zero.
•  Making heat pumps as cheap to buy and run as a gas boiler by growing the heat 
pump market to support 600,000 installations per year by 2028 and expanding 
UK manufacturing – with the ambition of working with industry to reduce costs 
by at least 25-50% by 2025 and to parity with gas boilers by 2030 at the latest. 
•  Supporting households in making this transition with a new £450 million Boiler 
Upgrade Scheme providing £5,000 capital grants and a new market-based 
incentive for heating system manufacturers, whilst investing £60 million in heat 
pump innovation – making them beautiful, smaller, easier to install.
•  Consulting on phasing out the dirtiest and most expensive fossil fuels first - new 
oil, coal and liquefied petroleum gas heating - and replace with low carbon 
alternatives in non-domestic buildings from 2024 and homes from 2026, 
following natural appliance replacement cycles.
•  Committing to action on addressing distortions in fuel prices to ensure that low 
carbon technologies are no more expensive to run than fossil fuel boilers.
•  Helping households and businesses reduce their energy bills while making buildings 
healthier and more comfortable benefiting from warmer, comfier, more valuable 
buildings through:
•  Upgrading fuel poor homes to EPC Band C by 2030 where reasonably 
practicable and providing additional funding to the Home Upgrade Grant and the 
Social Housing Decarbonisation Fund – investing £1.75 billion. 
135Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
•  Consulting on phasing in higher minimum performance standards to ensure 
all homes meet EPC Band C by 2035, where cost-effective, practical and 
affordable. 
•  Setting long-term regulatory standards to upgrade Privately Rented Homes to 
EPC C by 2028 and considering setting a long-term regulatory standard for 
Social Housing, subject to consultation. 
•  Reducing the energy consumption in commercial and industrial buildings in 
England and Wales by 2030, using measures including regulations and a 
performance-based measurement scheme.
•  Investing a further £1.425 billion in the Public Sector Decarbonisation Scheme, 
with the aim of reducing direct emissions from public sector buildings by 
75% by 2037.
•  Setting a minimum energy efficiency standard of EPC Band B by 2030 for 
privately rented commercial buildings in England and Wales.
•  Establishing large scale trials of hydrogen for heating to take decisions in 2026 on 
the role of hydrogen in decarbonising heating, and consult on the case for enabling 
or requiring hydrogen-ready boilers and broader heating system efficiencies.
•  Continuing to grow and decarbonise the UK Heat Network market through the £338 
million Heat Network Transformation Programme of which at least £270m will go 
towards the Green Heat Network Fund, introducing sector regulation and new heat 
network zones by 2025. 
•  Launching a new world-class policy framework for energy-related products to 
ensure products use less energy, reducing emissions and household bills.
Progress to date
1. The UK has around 30 million buildings46  2. The package of measures presented 
and includes some of the oldest building stock  here, and in our Heat and Buildings Strategy 
in Europe.47 In total, buildings are responsible  (HBS) and associated consultations, delivers 
for around 17% of our national emissions.48  on commitments made in the Ten Point Plan 
Currently, 1.7 million fossil fuel heating systems  for a Green Industrial Revolution and the 
are installed per year (gas, oil, and coal).49 The  Energy White Paper. In the Ten Point Plan, 
vast majority of emissions from buildings result  we committed to deliver greener buildings. 
from heating. Including indirect emissions (e.g.  Since then, we have announced £60 million 
from electricity generation) emissions from  to support decarbonisation of Social Housing 
heating buildings make up around 78% of all  and  have allocated over £1 billion from the 
buildings emissions and about 21% of all UK  Public Sector Decarbonisation Scheme, in 
emissions.50 Overall, between 1990 and 2019,  doing so, supporting up to 30,000 jobs. 
net UK greenhouse gas emissions from heat 
and buildings decreased by 17%. 
136Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
3. Homes: The UK already has a strong  performing tenure, with the greatest proportion 
track record improving energy performance,  of homes below EPC band D.56 Improving the 
with 40% of our homes now above Energy  energy performance of all homes and taking a 
Performance (EPC) Band C, up from just 9%  ‘fabric first’ approach, by improving the energy 
in 2008. There are approximately 28 million  efficiency will be key to ensuring the transition 
households in the UK,51 and 86% of homes  to low carbon heating is cost effective.57
in England use natural gas boilers.52 Across 
4. Non-domestic buildings: There are 
the UK, 9% of the energy consumed to heat 
approximately 1.7 million non-domestic 
homes is provided by other fossil fuels, such 
(commercial, industrial and public) properties 
as oil and coal, generally in homes that do 
in England and Wales.58 Non-domestic 
not have access to the gas grid.53 In 2019, 
buildings account for around a quarter 
approximately 15 million (60%) of homes in 
of UK building emissions.59 Commercial 
England had a lower energy performance, 
and industrial buildings over 1,000 m2 are 
with ratings of EPC band D and below.54 The 
responsible for over half of the energy used by 
largest proportion of homes in England are 
commercial and industrial buildings (excluding 
owner-occupied (64% in 2019), with a much 
process heat) but account for only 5% of the 
smaller proportion being socially rented (17% 
stock.60 Public sector buildings account for 
in 2019), or privately rented (19% in 2019).55 
about 9% of building emissions.61 
Owner-occupied homes are now the worst 
Net zero transition and economic opportunities 
5. By 2050, buildings will need to be almost  Seizing new opportunities
completely decarbonised, by making use of a 
6. The decarbonisation trajectory of the sector 
combination of technologies to minimise their 
presents significant potential for investment 
carbon emissions and maximise their energy 
and export opportunities for goods and 
performance. The scale of this challenge is 
services. Deployment of energy efficiency 
significant, but we will take an approach that 
measures and low carbon heating in domestic 
goes with the grain of consumer behaviour 
and non-domestic buildings, in line with the 
and maximises consumer choice, to ensure a 
ambitions and outcomes in the Heat and 
smooth and gradual transition for households 
Buildings Strategy, will drive up to £6 billion 
and businesses. Much like the move to electric 
gross value added (GVA) per year by 2030.62
vehicles, the move to low carbon options 
such as electric heat pumps will be a gradual 
7. This will be investment not just in the 
transition from niche product to mainstream 
buildings themselves, but in the infrastructure 
consumer option. To ensure that we all benefit 
that supplies them. Government support will 
from cleaner, warmer and comfier buildings, 
stimulate this investment and will need to be 
will need to improve the energy efficiency 
focussed on growing key markets for low 
of our buildings and products, end the use 
carbon heat and supporting vulnerable and 
of fossil fuel heating systems and switch to 
low-income households, the social housing 
low carbon sources, and integrate the use of 
sector, and the public sector.
smart technologies that give more control to 
consumers. 
137Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
8. Decarbonising the heat and buildings  •  Improving health. COVID-19 has 
sector will regenerate communities and open  highlighted the importance of good 
up new employment opportunities right  ventilation in buildings. Improving the 
around the UK. Based on current estimates,  energy performance of our buildings, 
policies and proposals to reduce emissions  whilst ensuring good ventilation, will 
from buildings could support up to 100,000  ensure they are efficient and healthy 
jobs by the middle of the 2020s and up to  environments. This can help avoid many 
175,000 in 2030. Jobs will be supported  physical illnesses, including heart and lung 
across a range of areas – from manufacturing  conditions65. Reducing the number of fossil 
to services, and from installation to research  fuel boilers will also significantly reduce 
and development.  the various pollutants emitted, including 
nitrous oxides, which negatively impact 
9. Decarbonising buildings will deliver a range 
human health. Improved thermal comfort 
of benefits:
also leads to better health and wellbeing 
•  Levelling up. Decarbonisation will support  as well as reducing the likelihood of 
clean, local growth in every region of the  condensation and mould.
UK, while investing in equality of living  •  Increasing property value. Studies 
standards and job creation. Reducing  indicate that more energy efficient 
heat and buildings emissions will require  properties typically have a higher value 
installing energy efficiency measures and  than less efficient ones. Evidence from a 
new heating systems, which rely on local  study commissioned by BEIS indicated 
supply chains and businesses.  that properties with an EPC C rating 
•  Reducing energy bills and business  were worth around 5% more than those 
operating costs. Inefficient homes are  currently at EPC D rating, after controlling 
more expensive to run. The Energy  for other factors such as property size and 
Efficiency Infrastructure Group estimate  archetype.66
that upgrading all UK homes to EPC 
Our 2050 vision and how 
band C could provide annual energy cost 
we get there
savings of £7.5 billion.63
•  Tackling fuel poverty. In 2014, the  10. Our approach to this transition must be 
Government introduced a statutory fuel  affordable and achievable for all and, following 
poverty target for England, to improve as  successes in power and electric vehicles, we 
many fuel-poor homes as is reasonably  will utilise long-term signals alongside early 
practicable to a minimum EPC rating of  investments to bring down costs and improve 
band C by the end of 2030. Tangible,  consumer offers:
targeted support for more deprived areas 
•  Investing in innovation. Continuing to 
can be achieved through action to upgrade 
work with industry to refine processes and 
poor-performing buildings, leading to 
technologies to deliver value-for-money 
warmer, healthier homes and lower energy 
and value for the UK economy – with an 
bills. We recently published an updated 
emphasis on making technology cheaper, 
fuel poverty strategy for England.64
easier to install and designed to appeal to 
consumers. We are investing in technology 
now, in trialling hydrogen ahead of 
strategic decisions on the role of hydrogen 
for heating in 2026; and £60 million in heat 
pump innovation – making them beautiful, 
smaller and easier to install.
138Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
•  Prioritising no or low regrets actions.  •  Taking a whole-sector and whole-
Reducing bills through a fabric-first  system approach. Considering the 
approach to improving building thermal  heating system in the context of what is 
efficiency through, for example, insulation,  most appropriate for the whole building to 
draught-proofing and increasing the energy  minimise costs, as well as accounting for 
performance and capability of products  local suitability, environmental impacts, and 
and appliances.67 air quality. 
•  Growing supply chains and bringing 
11. The benefits of more efficient, low 
down costs: Making heat pumps as 
carbon buildings for consumers are clear: 
cheap to buy and run as a gas boiler by 
smarter, better performing buildings, reduced 
growing the heat pump market to support 
energy bills and healthier, more comfortable 
600,000 installations per year by 2028 and 
environments. Households and businesses 
expanding UK manufacturing – reducing 
will need to play their part in decarbonising 
costs by at least 25-50% by 2025 and to 
their buildings, but we need to ensure that the 
parity with gas boilers by 2030. To help 
costs of doing so fall fairly across society. 
achieve this we are announcing a new 
£450 million Boiler Upgrade Scheme –  12. Based on our whole-system modelling, 
offering households £5,000 grants when  by 2050, emissions associated with heat and 
they install an air source heat pump. buildings could need to drop by 98-100% 
compared to 2019, down to 0-2 space 
•  Continuing to support those most in 
between digit and unit MtCO e. In the interim, 
need. Supporting the vulnerable through  2
to meet our NDC and CB6 targets, we expect 
the transition to low carbon buildings 
emissions could fall by 25-37% by 2030 and 
and meeting our statutory fuel poverty 
47-62% by 2035, compared to 2019 levels. 
target. We will continue to ensure financial 
These figures are based on an indicative heat 
support is available for those who need 
and buildings pathway contributing to the 
it most. We are investing a further £1.75 
whole-economy net zero and interim targets 
billion in funding for our Home Upgrade 
(see figure 20 below).
Grant and Social Housing Decarbonisation 
Fund schemes, which provide support for 
low-income households in installing energy 
efficiency and low carbon heating.
•  Balancing certainty and flexibility. 
Providing stability for investment through 
clear long-term signals that work with the 
grain of the market and minimise impact 
on consumers. For example, aiming to 
phase out the installation of new and 
replacement natural gas boilers by 2035, in 
line with the natural replacement cycle and 
only once costs of low carbon alternatives 
have come down.
•  Ensuring buildings are resilient to the 
impacts of climate change. Implementing 
measures to ensure homes and buildings 
are well ventilated and protected against 
rising temperatures. 
139Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Figure 20: Indicative heat and buildings emissions pathway to 2037
140
120
100
e)
2
O Pre-NZS policies
C
80
t
M
 (
s
n
o 60
si
s
mi NZS delivery
E 40 pathway
20
2050
Range
0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Source: BEIS analysis 
13. We have developed three high-level  14. In all scenarios the following will 
illustrative scenarios to reflect different  be important:
technology mixes that would allow us to 
•  Improving the energy performance of 
decarbonise heating of buildings, contributing 
buildings to keep buildings warm and 
towards meeting our Carbon Budget 6 
comfortable, keep bills down, minimise 
target. We are committed to taking strategic 
the impacts of transition on the energy 
decisions on the role of hydrogen for heating 
system, and make switching to low carbon 
in 2026, following trials, which will further 
heating easier. 
inform out pathway to 2050. Realising these 
scenarios would be consistent with our  •  Phase out of heating appliances that 
trajectory to net zero in 2050. These are: a  are only capable of burning fossil fuels, 
high hydrogen scenario, a high electrification  consistent with our ambition to phase out 
scenario and a dual energy system scenario.  the installation of new and replacement 
natural gas boilers by 2035, and phase 
out the installation of high-carbon fossil 
fuel boilers in properties not connected to 
the gas grid by 2026 (and 2024 for non-
domestic buildings).
140Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
•  Heat pumps: these will be the best low  17. To ensure we drive this level of heat pump 
carbon heating option for some types  deployment, further policy would be required 
of buildings, for example, if they are  to phase out installation of new fossil fuel 
new buildings or off the gas grid. We  heating faster. We could grow the heat pump 
have set a target of 600,000 heat pump  market and transition consumers in stages, 
installations per year by 2028, from roughly  while continuing to follow natural replacement 
35,000 currently. We expect this to be  cycles to work with the grain of consumer 
the minimum number of heat pumps that  behaviour. For homes, we could focus initially 
need to be deployed each year after 2028  on key segments of the domestic building 
across any scenario, and all scenarios  stock, for example based on tenure, property 
other than high hydrogen will require much  age or fabric efficiency. 
higher deployment. Of the 600,000 heat 
18. The increased deployment of heat pumps 
pumps per year, we expect about 200,000 
will be accompanied by investment in the 
to be in new build properties.
infrastructure we need to meet increased 
•  Heat networks: they use hot water in pipes 
electricity demand, including the generation 
to deliver heating (and in some cases cold 
of low carbon electricity and additional 
water for cooling) to many consumers from 
grid capacity.
a centralised heat source. Heat networks 
could supply up to 20% of UK heat  High hydrogen scenario
demand by 2050, up from 3% of UK heat 
19. In this scenario, hydrogen has proven 
supply today.68 
feasible and preferable as a solution for 
15. To achieve the level of emissions  heating most UK buildings, and decisions 
reductions in the heat and buildings sector  taken in 2026 set the UK on a path to 
indicated by our delivery pathway to 2037,  converting most of the national gas grid to 
we will need additional public and private  hydrogen. We would expect to begin the 
investment of approximately £200 billion.  transition by converting a pilot hydrogen town 
by the end of the decade and then accelerate 
High electrification scenario
rollout. The conversion would likely start by 
building out from existing hydrogen production 
16. In this scenario, we assume there is no 
and use in industrial clusters, and roll-out 
significant use of hydrogen for heating in 
would involve switchover on an area-by-area 
buildings. This may be because hydrogen 
basis in different locations. 
is not proven to be feasible, cost-effective, 
or preferable as a solution for low carbon 
20. Due to the infrastructure and supply 
heating, or because its deployment has been 
chain requirements of a hydrogen conversion 
significantly delayed. In this scenario, we 
we estimate that in this scenario, we would 
would need to continue the rapid growth of 
convert around 4 million homes to using 
the heat pump market beyond 600,000 per 
low carbon hydrogen by 2035. New heating 
year in 2028 to up to 1.9 million per year from 
system installations should be low carbon or 
2035, resulting in roughly 13 million homes 
hydrogen-ready, meaning ready for a planned 
using low carbon heating systems by 2035 – 
future conversion, from 2035. We estimate 
around 11 million with heat pumps and around 
that by 2035 roughly 13 million homes will 
2 million using heat networks. have low carbon heating, comprising around 
7 million with heat pumps, 4 million using 
hydrogen, and around 2 million homes using 
heat networks. 
141Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Dual energy system scenarios •  There is widespread consumer demand 
for hybrid systems that utilise a mix of 
21. In this scenario, both hydrogen and 
energy sources.
electrification prove feasible and preferable 
as heating solutions to large numbers of  22. It is too early to determine the policy 
consumers. This could arise in several forms:  framework that might support this mixed 
transition. Any scenario in which hydrogen 
•  All or most of the gas grid is converted 
is an available option for consumers will 
to low carbon hydrogen, but the costs 
require public policy decisions to enable 
and benefits of switching to hydrogen 
cost-effective and co-ordinated investment in 
versus installing a heat pump are viewed 
infrastructure and supply chains, and ensure 
differently by different consumers. This 
consumer choice and other public interests 
could result in a high switchover to both 
are protected. If the case for converting the 
hydrogen and heat pumps on the gas grid.
network to hydrogen differs strongly from area 
•  There is partial but still extensive  to area, more of the preparation may need to 
conversion of the gas grid to hydrogen,  take place at a regional or local level. 
based on differing geographical or built 
environment factors. This would require 
careful consideration of which parts of 
the grid would be converted and where 
responsibility for decisions about the costs 
and benefits of converting different areas 
should lie. 
142Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Future scenarios - what factors 
we are going to consider in 
making decisions for mass 
decarbonisation of heating
Over the 2020s, we will need to start taking  such as solar PV, wind and electric vehicles. 
more decisive steps about which technologies  Conversely, it is likely hydrogen appliances will 
and infrastructure should be rolled out, where  cost approximately the same as natural gas 
and when, and accordingly, where we need  appliances (around £3k).
to target investment, skills, and other enabling 
Running costs
actions. We aim to make decisions about 
the role of hydrogen in heating by 2026, and 
Heat pumps are significantly (2.5 – 3x) more 
commit to reviewing existing institutional 
efficient than gas boilers and may get even 
arrangements, as stated in our Heat and 
more efficient, therefore requiring much less 
Buildings Strategy, helping ensure that we 
energy to run. Currently, on average heating 
have an appropriate framework in place to 
a home with a heat pump costs more than 
facilitate decision making at all levels.
with a gas boiler. This is, in part, due to policy 
and social costs charged on electricity bills. 
Upfront costs
However, by addressing existing distortions 
The cost of installing a heat pump is currently  between electricity and gas prices, we will 
significantly more expensive than gas boilers  ensure heat pumps will be no more expensive 
and installation often requires additional  to run than gas boilers.
ancillary works, such as upgrading radiators. 
It is too early to properly estimate the running 
This can result in total installed costs of 
costs of hydrogen heating. The cost of 
around £10,000 for the average home. 
producing hydrogen is currently higher than 
However, the cost of installing heat pumps 
fossil fuels. Though the future production 
should fall significantly as the market scales 
costs of hydrogen will not be the same as the 
up, and the Heat and Buildings Strategy has 
ultimate cost to consumers, using hydrogen 
set ambitions on reducing the installed cost 
for heating could cost more than natural 
of heat pumps over this decade. We are 
gas heating. There remains uncertainty on 
also providing subsidy for first movers: through 
other issues that will impact on hydrogen 
the Boiler Upgrade Scheme, which will provide 
costs, such as, new and innovative means 
grants of £5,000 towards the cost of installing 
of production, the cost to store it, new and 
an air source heat pump and £6,000 for 
innovative business models, and the cost 
Ground Source Heat Pumps. We will look to 
of any changes to the gas grid that may 
help the market drive down the upfront costs, 
be required.
which leading market participants believe 
can make heat pumps as cheap to buy and 
run as a gas boiler by 2030. This ambition 
reflects the opportunity for innovation and 
economies of scale across the value chain 
and has been seen in other technologies 
143Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Consumer journey
Heat pumps, unlike most traditional fossil fuel 
boilers, tend to work by providing an ambient 
temperature, rather than short blasts through 
very hot radiators. Evaluation and research 
have shown that the majority of consumers are 
happy with the performance of their systems, 
and smart controls help consumers with this 
change. Installing heat pumps at the same 
time as carrying out building energy efficiency 
and heating system improvements allows for 
a single intervention and could prove more 
efficient for many households or businesses.
Hydrogen boilers will likely work in a similar 
way to gas boilers. Some adaptive measures 
might be needed to enable hydrogen, but 
requirements for this and associated costs 
are still uncertain and could vary significantly 
between different types of buildings. When 
switching over to hydrogen, the initial grid 
conversion process is likely to require streets 
or areas to be converted at the same time. It 
is expected that an engineer will need to have 
access to homes to do the changeover in a 
particular timeframe, and building residents 
are unlikely to have control over when 
this happens.
144Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Policies and proposals
Decarbonising heat 25. We are investing £60 million in a ‘Heat 
Pump Ready’ Programme which will support 
23. Much like the move to electric vehicles, 
the development of innovative solutions to 
the move to heat pumps will be a gradual 
improve deployment, tools and technologies 
transition from niche product to mainstream 
across the heat pump sector. These new 
consumer option. Our core commitment is 
opportunities will build on our previous Energy 
that we will aim to phase out the installation 
Innovation Programme activities, such as the 
of new and replacement natural gas boilers 
Electrification of Heat Demonstration Project.
in homes and buildings by 2035 at the latest, 
once costs have come down. This would be  26. Heat networks. Under the £338 million 
in line with the natural replacement cycle, and  Heat Network Transformation Programme, 
include hydrogen ready boilers in any areas  we will launch the £270 million Green Heat 
not converting to hydrogen, to ensure all  Network Fund to grow the market for low 
heating systems used in 2050 are compatible  carbon heat networks. We will also pass 
with net zero.  new legislation to regulate the sector for 
consumers, give heat networks the statutory 
24. Accelerating heat pump deployment. 
powers they need to build, and regulate 
We will grow the UK heat pump market 
the carbon emissions of projects from the 
to support 600,000 installations per year 
early 2030s. We will also deliver new heat 
by 2028. As part of this, and working with 
networks zones in England by 2025 where 
industry to do so, we will aim for cost parity 
heat networks are the default solution for 
between heat pumps and gas boilers by 2030 
decarbonising heating. Finally, we will work 
with significant cost reductions of at least 
with industry to increase the capacity and 
25-50% by 2025. To achieve this, we will 
capability of the UK supply chain to support 
introduce a range of new policies to support 
the sector to reach its growth potential 
heat pump deployment, including a new £450 
and look to improve performance of legacy 
million Boiler Upgrade Scheme over 2022/23 
networks through the Heat Network 
to 2024/25 with grants of £5,000 for an air 
Efficiency Scheme.
source heat pump. In addition, we will consult 
on phasing out the installation of new oil, coal, 
and LPG heating, and replace with low carbon 
alternatives such as heat pumps in off gas 
grid non-domestic buildings from 2024 and 
homes from 2026, and we will launch a new 
market-based incentive for heating system 
manufacturers, similar to that for CO  in cars. 
2
Subject to strategic decisions on the pathways 
and market conditions, we would look to grow 
the heat pump market beyond 600,000 per 
year in 2028 and potentially up to 1.7 million 
a year by 2035, and we will consult on our 
proposed approach to doing this. 
145Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
27. Hydrogen heating. We will work in  at the latest, where cost-effective, practical, 
partnership with industry and other key  and affordable. 
stakeholders to thoroughly assess the 
31. New Buildings. We will introduce 
feasibility, safety, consumer experience and 
regulations from 2025 through the Future 
other costs and benefits, of hydrogen as an 
Homes Standard to ensure all new homes 
option for heating our homes and workplaces. 
in England are ready for net zero by having 
We will support industry to develop and deliver 
a high standard of energy efficiency and low 
large scale trials of hydrogen for heating, 
carbon heating installed as standard. This 
including a neighbourhood trial by 2023 and 
should mean that all new homes will be fitted 
a village scale trial by 2025, and develop 
with a low carbon heat source such as a heat 
proposals for a possible ‘hydrogen town’ 
pump or connected to a low carbon heat 
before the end of the decade. We will develop 
network. To reinforce this, we will consult on 
the evidence base and frameworks necessary 
whether it is appropriate to end new gas grid 
to take strategic decisions on the role of 
connections, or whether to remove the duty to 
hydrogen in decarbonising heat in 2026. In 
connect from the Gas Distribution Networks. 
the shorter-term, we will work with the Health 
As an interim measure to the Future Homes 
and Safety Executive and industry partners 
Standard, we plan to introduce an uplift in 
to enable up to 20% hydrogen blending in 
standards, effective from June 2022, for 
suitable areas of the GB gas networks subject 
England that would result in a 31% reduction 
to the success of testing and trials, and value 
in carbon emissions from new homes 
for money assessment.
compared to current standards. We will also 
28. Hydrogen-ready boilers and boiler  respond to our consultation for the Future 
standards. We are aiming to consult shortly  Buildings Standard for new non-domestic 
on the case for enabling or requiring new  buildings. 
gas boilers to be readily convertible to use 
32. Domestic private rented sector. 
hydrogen (‘hydrogen-ready’) by 2026. We will 
We will build on our 2020 consultation on 
also use this consultation to test proposals 
strengthening the Minimum Energy Efficiency 
on the future of broader boiler and heating 
Standards to EPC band C by 2028 to set long 
system efficiency and explore the best ways to 
term minimum regulatory standards consistent 
reduce carbon emissions from our gas heating 
with our net zero commitment for private rental 
systems over the next decade.
sector. We are aiming to publish a response 
29. Biomethane in the gas grid. We will  to this consultation by the end of the year We 
deliver a new Green Gas Support Scheme  have provided significant additional support 
(GGSS) to support the injection of biomethane  to local authorities to ensure compliance and 
from anaerobic digestion (expected to  enforcement of these regulations, building on 
deliver 2.8TWh of renewable heat per year in  earlier compliance and enforcement pilots. 
2030/31), and we will explore the development  This includes providing £4.3m to 57 local 
of commercial-scale gasification and the  authorities to support activity in these areas. 
replacement of the GGSS with a long-term  We plan to scale up activity further in the 
biomethane support scheme. coming years. We have also set out proposals 
to strengthen the compliance and enforcement 
Improving buildings 
framework under our recent EPC Band C 
consultation. This includes the introduction 
30. Our core commitment is to reduce bills, 
of a compliance and exemption database to 
whilst improving comfort, health and home 
support local authority enforcement of the 
value, through ensuring as many homes as 
Regulation. 
possible to achieve EPC Band C by 2035 
146Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
33. Owner occupied homes.  We are also  37. Public Sector. We have committed to 
exploring opportunities to improve the energy  halve direct emissions from public sector 
performance of owner-occupier homes.  buildings by 2032, against 2017 levels, 
We have conducted a series of stakeholder  and we aim to further reduce emissions 
workshops on the case for action, with over  from public sector buildings by 75% by 
50 representatives from the housing sector,  2037. To help achieve this, we will provide 
landlord representatives, retrofit supply chain,  £1.425 billion additional funding for the Public 
NGOs, and consumer organisations. We  Sector Decarbonisation Scheme (PSDS) 
plan to consult on options to upgrade homes  over 2022/23 to 2024/25, and through our 
in the owner occupier sector. We will work  Greening Government Commitments (GGCs) 
with owner-occupiers to help them improve  which sets targets to reduce emissions from 
the liveability of their homes. The provision  central government departments and arms-
of green finance will be an important step in  length bodies. We have also initiated the 
making this easier and more accessible. Public Sector Low Carbon Skills Fund which 
provides complementary funding alongside the 
34. Social housing. We will provide £800 
PSDS to enable public sector organisations 
million additional funding to the Social 
to acquire expert skills in order to unlock 
Housing Decarbonisation Fund (SHDF) over 
decarbonisation projects.
2022/23 to 2024/25, which will deliver energy 
performance improvements to social housing.  38. Non-domestic buildings. The Energy 
We will also consider setting a long-term  White Paper set a minimum energy efficiency 
regulatory standard to improve social housing  standard of EPC Band B by 2030 for 
to EPC Band C and consider levers required  privately rented commercial buildings in 
to decarbonise the stock in line with net zero.  England and Wales. Later this year we plan 
We will consult the sector before setting any  to consult on regulating the non-domestic 
regulatory standard. owner-occupied building stock, and we are 
considering whether this should align with 
35. Low Income/Fuel Poor Consumers. 
the private rented sector minimum energy 
We will ensure as many fuel-poor homes as 
efficiency standards. We will also respond 
reasonably practicable achieve a minimum 
to the 2021 consultation on introducing a 
energy efficiency rating of C by the end of 
performance-based policy framework in large 
2030. To help achieve this, we will provide 
commercial and industrial buildings and pilot 
£950 million additional funding over 2022/23 
the scheme in 2022. 
to 2024/25 for off-gas-grid properties through 
the Home Upgrade Grant (HUG) to provide  39. We will look to consult stakeholders on 
ongoing support for low-income households  the Small Business Energy Efficiency Scheme 
living off the mains gas grid with energy  (SBEES) later this year. The scheme will aim 
efficiency and low carbon heating upgrades.  to remove barriers for SMEs in accessing 
We will also expand and extend the Energy  energy efficiency measures, drive forward 
Company Obligation Scheme and the Warm  better buildings performance and aid SMEs 
Homes Discount Scheme until 2026. in meeting regulatory standards. Finally, 
we have consulted on strengthening the 
36. Net zero backstop for homes. We 
Energy Savings Opportunity Scheme (ESOS), 
will consider on an ultimate backstop date 
which is a mandatory energy assessment 
to ensure that all homes meet a net zero 
scheme for large businesses’ energy use and 
minimum energy performance standard before 
opportunities to improve energy efficiency. 
2050, where cost effective, practical, and 
affordable.
147Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
•  Energy-related products. We have  •  Green finance. Catalysing the market 
published a policy framework setting out  for Green Finance is a priority. We 
illustrative proposals for raising minimum  are working with mortgage lenders to 
energy performance standards and  support homeowners to improve the 
improving consumer information for a  energy performance of their properties 
range of high potential products, including  and will publish our response to our 
but not limited to space heating, cooking,  lenders consultation in due course. 
taps and showers and lighting. We plan  Government is also exploring the case for 
to consult on more concrete proposals  a further green home finance innovation 
between 2022 and 2023 ahead of  programme, focussed on supporting 
implementing measures from 2025. lenders to develop green finance products 
targeted at consumer types who will be 
Enabling actions
impacted by future regulation, and which 
the market is unlikely to develop on its 
40. There are a range of barriers to home 
own in the short term. BEIS has invited 
energy performance improvements, which we 
the UK Infrastructure Bank (UKIB) to help 
will also need to address to help people act: 
steer this work, and we will work further 
•  Advice & information. Our existing  with the UKIB to explore whether they 
Simple Energy Advice service has  can play a wider role in scaling up green 
received over 1.5m users to date. We will  home finance.
enhance our digitally led service, and are 
41. Rebalancing energy prices: Clean, 
considering options to support tailored 
cheap electricity is an everyday essential. We 
retrofit advice in local areas. The aim is to 
have seen the impact of overreliance on gas 
create a Government-led home energy 
pushing up prices for hardworking people but 
advice journey, supported by tailored 
our plan to expand our domestic renewables 
local advice. This includes moving our 
will push down electricity wholesale prices. 
Simple Energy Advice service to GOV.UK, 
However, current pricing of electricity and gas 
which will improve user experience, and 
does not incentivise consumers to make green 
supporting local advice provision. This will 
choices, such as switching from gas boilers 
help households to improve the energy 
to electric heat pumps. We want to reduce 
performance of their homes, and move 
electricity costs so we will also look at options 
towards net zero.
to shift or rebalance energy levies (such as RO 
and FiTs) and obligations (such as ECO) away 
from electricity bills over this decade. This will 
include looking at options to expand carbon 
pricing and remove costs from electricity bills 
while ensuring that we continue to limit any 
impact on bills overall. We know that in the 
long run, green products are more efficient 
and cheaper, and we are putting fairness and 
affordability at the heart of our approach. We 
will launch a Fairness and Affordability Call for 
Evidence on these options for energy levies 
and obligations to help rebalance electricity 
and gas prices and to support green choices, 
with a view to taking decisions in 2022.
148Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
42. Developing a workforce pipeline with  •  We will also continue to work with Ofgem, 
the skills to meet the requirements of net  distribution network operators, and other 
zero transition:  local actors on the approach to planning 
the network in Great Britain and delivering 
•  The increase in deployment of low carbon 
smart, secure, cost-effective solutions. 
heating systems over the coming decade 
This will include considering the potential 
will require a significant escalation in the 
for storage and hybrid technologies in 
number of trained, high-quality installers. 
combination with flexible tariffs. 
With this in mind, we have launched the 
independent Green Jobs Taskforce with 
key industry bodies to advise on how we 
can have the skilled workforce to deliver 
net zero and support people in high 
carbon sectors with the transition.
•  We will encourage current gas engineers, 
electricians, and those with transferrable 
skills in complementary sectors, to 
retrain and specialise in smarter, greener, 
and cleaner technologies. There are 
over 140,000 plumbers and heating 
and ventilation engineers in the UK. 
Approximately 90% of builders stated 
they would be willing to retrain to meet 
the demand for new roles and skills’ 
changes in the future.69 Attracting new 
entrants to the sector also provides a great 
opportunity to diversify the workforce. We 
will work with industry to support training 
and new routes of entry to help boost 
heat pump installer numbers and other 
areas of skills shortage to support the 
decarbonisation of homes. We will also 
work with industry and the low carbon 
projects supported through the Green Heat 
Network Fund to increase opportunities to 
gain skills in the heat networks sector.
149Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Working together across the UK 
Examples of policy action by the Scottish Government, Welsh Government 
and Northern Ireland Executive 
UK Government is working across all levels of government and with Devolved Administrations 
to ensure consistent action to reduce emissions across the heat and buildings sector, and 
across the UK.
Wales  Scotland 
The Optimised Retrofit Programme is testing  The Scottish Government published its 
a new approach to decarbonising homes,  Heat in Buildings Strategy on 7 October 
based on the recommendations of the Jofeh  2021. This sets out a vision and actions for 
Report.70 The programme is delivering fabric  the decarbonisation of heat in homes and 
improvements, heating technology and  buildings in line with Scotland’s statutory 
intelligent use of energy supplies to more  climate targets. The Scottish Government will 
than 1,500 homes across Wales. Significant  allocate at least £1.8 billion over the next five 
Welsh Government investment is supporting  years to support the accelerated deployment 
social landlords to decarbonise 230,000 social  of heat and energy efficiency measures in 
homes over the next decade, and the learning  homes and buildings. This investment will 
from the programme will be used to help  help to cut emissions, create jobs, strengthen 
decarbonise Wales’s 1.2 million private-rented  supply chains, and tackle fuel poverty. The 
and owner-occupier homes. Scottish Government offers cashback grants 
to all homeowners as part of the Home Energy 
Scotland (HES) Loan Scheme, up to £6,000  
for energy efficiency improvements and up 
to £7,500 for new renewable heating. It is 
also bringing forward the requirement for all 
homes to be upgraded to meet at least EPC 
C standards or equivalent by 2033 with the 
majority meeting this standard by 2030.
Subject to devolved competence, the Scottish 
Government has committed to phasing 
out the need to install new or replacement 
fossil fuel boilers, in off gas areas from 2025 
and in on gas areas from 2030, subject to 
technological developments and decisions 
by the UK Government in reserved areas. 
It is currently developing regulations which 
will require new buildings receiving a warrant 
from 2024 to use zero emissions heating 
and cooling. 
150Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Northern Ireland There are several schemes currently available 
to support energy efficiency improvements 
A phased programme is planned to uplift 
and the installation of lower carbon heating, 
Northern Ireland’s building regulations, taking 
including the Boiler Replacement Scheme, 
developments in other administrations into 
Affordable Warmth, and the Northern Ireland 
account, to provide ultra-high energy efficient 
Sustainable Energy Programme (NISEP).  A 
building fabric and services with low carbon 
new Northern Ireland Energy Strategy is 
heating standards for new buildings as soon 
expected to be published by the end of 
as is practicable and no later than 2026/27.  
2021, which will provide further information 
Consideration may be given to earlier uptake 
on proposals to phase out coal and solid 
of requirements for low carbon heating 
fuels, along with fossil fuel home heating oil. 
solutions from 2022/23, if deemed feasible 
The Energy Strategy will also provide further 
following consultation with industry. 
information on proposals to decarbonise 
the natural gas network, including through 
future injection of biomethane and potential 
hydrogen blending. Further detail will also 
be provided on the transition to low carbon 
heating options, such as heat pumps, and 
future proposed support schemes, including 
energy efficiency and low carbon heating pilot 
schemes, which are intended to be launched 
in 2022/23.
151Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
3v. Transport
Setting the pace for greener, better transport
Our Key Commitments
•  End the sale of new petrol and diesel cars and vans from 2030; from 2035, all new 
cars and vans must be zero emission at the tailpipe.
•  Introduce a zero emission vehicle mandate setting targets for a percentage of 
manufacturers’ new car and van sales to be zero emission each year from 2024.
•  Take forward our pledge to end the sale of all new, non-zero emission road vehicles 
by 2040, from motorcycles to buses and HGVs, subject to consultation.
•  Ensure the UK’s charging infrastructure network is reliable, accessible, and meets 
the demands of all motorists. Later this year, we will publish an EV infrastructure 
strategy, setting out our vision for infrastructure rollout, and roles for the public and 
private sectors in achieving it.
•  Building on the £1.9 billion from Spending Review 2020, the Government has 
committed an additional £620 million to support the transition to electric vehicles. 
The funding will support the rollout of charging infrastructure, with a particular focus 
on local on-street residential charging, and targeted plug-in vehicle grants.
•  Build a globally competitive zero emission vehicle supply chain and ensure our 
automotive sector is at the forefront of the transition to net zero.
•  Lead by example with 25% of the government car fleet ultra low emission by 
December 2022 and all the government car and van fleet zero emission by 2027.
•  Take action to increase average road vehicle occupancy by 2030 and reduce the 
barriers to data sharing across the transport sector.
•  Maximise carbon savings from the use of low carbon fuels, including by increasing 
the main Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation (RTFO) target.
•  Increase the share of journeys taken by public transport, cycling and walking.
•  Support decarbonisation by investing more than £12 billion in local transport 
systems over the current Parliament.
•  Invest £2 billion in cycling and walking, building first hundreds, then thousands of 
miles of segregated cycle lane and more low-traffic neighbourhoods with the aim 
that half of all journeys in towns and cities will be cycled or walked by 2030. As 
announced in the Transport Decarbonisation Plan, we will create at least one zero 
emission transport city.
152Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
•  Invest £3 billion in the National Bus Strategy, creating integrated networks, more 
frequent services, and bus lanes to speed journeys, and support delivery of 4,000 
new zero emission buses and the infrastructure needed to support them.
•  Electrify more railway lines as part of plans to deliver a net zero rail network by 2050, 
with the ambition to remove all diesel-only trains by 2040.
•  Plot a course to net zero for the UK domestic maritime sector, phase out the sale of 
new non-zero emission domestic shipping vessels and accelerate the development 
of zero emission technology and infrastructure in the UK. We will engage with 
industry to explore establishing a UK Shipping Office for Reducing Emissions (UK-
SHORE) to transform the UK into a global leader in the design and manufacturing of 
clean maritime technology.
•  Become a leader in zero-emission flight, kick-starting commercialisation of UK 
sustainable aviation fuels (SAF), and developing a UK SAF mandate, to enable the 
delivery of 10% SAF by 2030, and we will be supporting UK industry with a £180m 
funding to support the development of SAF plants. 
Progress to date
1. Domestic transport has the largest share of  3. Removing tailpipe emissions from road 
UK greenhouse gas emissions of any sector  transport is a clear priority and we must 
across the economy, at 23% in 2019. The  continue the progress we have made to date. 
majority (55%) of these emissions are from  We have expanded our commitments in this 
passenger cars, contributing 68 MtCO e.  area and will set ambitious but achievable 
2
This is followed by heavy goods vehicles and  phase out dates for every type of road vehicle. 
light goods vehicles contributing 19 MtCO e  Alongside the Transport Decarbonisation Plan, 
2
(16%) and 19 MtCO e (16%) respectively.  we published the 2035 Delivery Plan outlining 
2
The remaining emissions in domestic  the key timelines, milestones, and progress 
shipping, road transport, rail, and domestic  towards the Ten Point Plan commitment to 
aviation contribute a combined further  accelerate the shift to zero emission vehicles.
16 MtCO e (13%).71
2 4. There are now over 600,000 plug-in electric 
2. We must deliver a step change in the  vehicles in the UK. In September 2021, more 
breadth and scale of our ambitions and, to  than one in five new cars sold had a plug. 
this end, in July 2021 we published our world  Additionally, more than 300 walking and 
leading Transport Decarbonisation Plan. This  cycling schemes have been delivered since 
covered all areas of transport and set out an  2020. For public transport, our National Bus 
ambitious but deliverable pathway to reaching  Strategy for England, published in March, sets 
net zero and delivering against carbon  out a vision of a transformed bus industry 
budgets along the way. The pathway we have  and a green bus revolution. Rail is already the 
set out is not about stopping people from  greenest form of motorised transport, with 
doing things. Rather, it’s about doing the same  almost 38% of the network electrified and 
things differently. We want to be a world leader  significantly more to come as set out in the 
in green technologies, and encourage more  Great British Railways White Paper in May. 
sustainable travel choices.
 
153Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Net zero transition and economic opportunities 
Our 2050 vision and how we  6. Based on our whole system modelling, 
by 2050, total transport emissions, including 
get there 
international aviation and shipping,  could 
5. Every place in the UK will have its own net  need to drop by 76-86% compared to 2019, 
zero emission transport network before 2050,  down to 23-40MtCO e. In the interim, to meet 
2
serving the unique needs of its communities.  our NDC and CB6 targets,72 we expect they 
Sustainability will be at the heart of levelling up.  could fall by 22-33% by 2030 and 46-59% by 
People everywhere will feel the benefits –  2035, compared to 2019 levels. These figures 
villages, towns, cities, and countryside will  are based on an indicative transport sector 
be cleaner, greener, healthier, and more  pathway contributing to the whole-economy 
prosperous and pleasant environments in  net zero and interim targets. Our potential 
which to live, work and enjoy. pathway also indicates residual emissions 
from domestic transport could need to fall 
by around 34-45% by 2030 and 65-76% by 
2035, relative to 2019 levels (see figure 21). 
We anticipate that international aviation and 
shipping emissions could need to fall by up 
to 12% by 2035, relative to 2019 levels (see 
figure 22). 
Figure 21: Indicative domestic transport emissions pathway to 2037
160
140
120
e)
O2 100
C
Pre-TDP & NZS policies
t
M and proposals
 ( 80
s
n
o
si
s 60
mi
E
40
NZS delivery
pathway
20
2050
Range
0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Source: BEIS analysis 
154Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Figure 22: Indicative international aviation and shipping emissions 
pathway to 2037
666000
Pre-TDP & NZS policies
and proposals
555000
NZS delivery pathway
e) 444000
2
O
C
t
M
 ( 333000
s
n
o
si
s
mi 222000
E 222000555000
RRRaaannngggeee
111000
Short-term COVID - 19
Uncertainty
000
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Source: BEIS analysis 
7. Much of the change needed to deliver  8. Our Transport Decarbonisation Plan sets 
net zero for the transport sector is already  out this ‘green print’ in detail. 
underway and makes sense even without 
•  The technology transformation started 
the global imperative of climate change. 
in cars and vans will spread to all road 
Decarbonisation will deliver fundamentally 
transport, from motorcycles to buses, 
better transport, for everyone, every day. It 
coaches and HGVs. Over time, the use 
will make it faster and more efficient, as well 
of zero emission vehicles will become 
as cleaner, and provide benefits including 
even cleaner, as the use of renewable 
increased reliability and better connectivity. 
energy in the UK’s electricity mix continues 
This is also a huge industrial opportunity, 
to increase. An extensive network of 
a once in a generation chance to increase 
charging and refuelling infrastructure for all 
economic growth and future prosperity – using 
vehicles will enable the transition and meet 
electricity, low carbon hydrogen, sustainable 
growing demand.
low carbon fuels and pedal power – to invest 
in new jobs across our country.
155Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
•  Low carbon fuels will continue to play a  •  UK aviation and shipping will achieve net 
crucial role in maximising carbon savings  zero emissions by 2050. Ahead of that, 
from road vehicles during the transition,  our domestic lead will act as a showcase 
whilst increasingly being required in  to the world and bolster our call to action 
other transport modes such as aviation  internationally, where cooperation and 
and maritime. This includes low carbon  collaboration through the International 
hydrogen, which is likely to be fundamental  Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the 
to achieving net zero in heavy transport  International Maritime Organization (IMO), 
applications and represents a major  will continue to be vital to decarbonise 
industrial opportunity. these industries.
•  We cannot simply rely on the electrification  •  The Government has set CB6 to formally 
of road transport, or believe that zero  include the UK’s share of international 
emission cars and lorries will solve all our  aviation and shipping emissions, as 
problems. As we build back better from  recommended by the CCC, which allows 
the pandemic, it will be essential to avoid  these emissions to be accounted for 
a car-led recovery. Alongside road vehicle  within CB6.
decarbonisation, we must increase the 
•  We will address aviation emissions through 
share of trips taken by public transport, 
new technology such as electric and 
cycling and walking. We want to make 
hydrogen aircraft, the commercialisation 
these modes the natural first choice for 
of sustainable aviation fuels, increasing 
all who can take them. As more journeys 
operational efficiencies, developing and 
are cycled or walked, and taken by public 
implementing market-based measures and 
transport, the carbon, air quality, noise and 
GHG removal methods, while influencing 
congestion benefits will be complemented 
consumers to make more sustainable 
by significant improvements in public 
choices when flying.
health and wellbeing.
•  The UK will play an important role in 
•  We will support and encourage modal shift 
developing zero emission maritime 
of freight from road to more sustainable 
technology, such as alternative fuel 
alternatives, such as rail, cargo bikes and 
powered vessels using ammonia or 
inland waterways. We will transform last 
methanol produced from low carbon 
mile deliveries, with zero emission HGVs 
hydrogen, or highly efficient batteries, 
and decarbonised deliveries made possible 
particularly where we can build on 
through the adoption of new delivery 
domestic expertise to capture early 
models, supported by accurate data and 
market share.
digital innovations which drive greater 
•  As we have stated in the Ten Point Plan 
efficiencies.
and the Transport Decarbonisation Plan, 
•  The rail network will be net zero 
we need to ensure that the taxation of 
emissions by 2050 through a sustained, 
motoring keeps pace with the change to 
long-term programme of investment in rail 
electric vehicles to ensure that we can 
electrification, supported by deployment of 
continue to fund the first-class public 
battery and hydrogen-powered trains.
services and infrastructure that people and 
families across the UK expect.
156Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Zero emission vehicles (ZEVs)
The transition to zero emission cars and vans is leading the way in our effort to decarbonise 
transport. The car and van sector is easier to decarbonise compared to other sections 
of the economy, through the combination of a proven low carbon technology that has 
significant advantages over the existing high carbon technology it replaces, reducing costs 
and growing consumer demand. Strong progress is already being made towards our 
2030/2035 phase out commitments:
•  Demand is rising: Industry figures show over 650,000 new plug-in cars 
registered in the UK since 2010, and over 1 in 7 cars sold so far in 2021 
had a plug.
•  Range is increasing as costs are falling: There are 20 EV models that come 
with a range of over 200 miles compared to the early Nissan Leaf models that 
delivered 60 miles, and battery prices are little more than a tenth of what they 
were in 2010. 
•  The charging infrastructure market is growing: There are now over 25,000 
public chargepoints in the UK, which includes over 4,700 rapid devices 
according to industry sources. This is one of the largest networks of rapid 
chargers in Europe. 
Seizing new opportunities  10. To achieve the level of emissions 
reductions in the transport sector indicated 
9. Across every form of transport, 
by our delivery pathway to 2037, we will need 
decarbonisation and growth will go hand 
additional public and private investment of 
in hand. The UK will play a leading role 
around £220 billion.
in this modern-day industrial revolution, 
consolidating our position as a world leader  11. Decarbonising the transport sector will 
in green technology, science, and research.  regenerate communities and open up new 
The imperative to decarbonise brings with  employment opportunities right around the 
it a host of other benefits, including new  UK. Based on current estimates, policies and 
business models, new modes, increasing  proposals to reduce emissions in the sector 
levels of autonomy, far better integration,  could support up to 22,000 jobs in 2024 and 
and a blurring of the distinction between  up to 74,000 jobs in 2030. Development of 
traditional forms of transport, as well as  road transport sector technologies as the 
public and private travel coming together  economy transitions to net zero could support 
to offer greater choice and flexibility. We will  up to 71,000 jobs in 2050. 
use research and development to build on 
the expertise of business and academia, 
maximising opportunities for growth, 
exports and hundreds of thousands of new 
high-quality jobs.
157Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
12. We need a skilled workforce capable  13. Decarbonising transport will also help 
of developing, implementing and operating  achieve other benefits: 
mobility solutions in a way that maximises 
•  It will improve health by removing a source 
the huge potential benefits they offer. The 
of air pollution. There will still be particulate 
government launched the Green Jobs 
emissions associated with road, rail, tyre, 
Taskforce, to advise the government, industry 
and brake wear, and we are working to 
and the skills sector on the action required 
tackle those too, but the toxic by-products 
to deliver the jobs and skills required for the 
of burning hydrocarbon fuels will be 
net zero transition. Our approach on green 
eliminated from the roadside and rail; 
jobs and skills is set out in the Green Jobs, 
Skills and Industries chapter of the Net  •  Physical inactivity costs the NHS up to 
Zero Strategy.  £1 billion per annum, with further indirect 
costs of £8.2 billion – active travel can 
reduce that; and
•  Over half the UK population is exposed to 
daytime noise levels above recommended 
limits. Zero emission vehicles – extremely 
quiet at low, urban speeds – will help 
address this. This will support levelling-up 
and help reinvent high streets as enjoyable 
places to live, work, visit and spend 
leisure time.
Policies and proposals
14. As the Transport Decarbonisation Plan  Cycling and walking
and this Strategy are implemented, we will 
16. Cycling and walking can help us tackle 
continue to consider the views of stakeholders 
some of the most challenging issues we face 
from across the UK. We will engage closely 
as a society, not just climate change, but 
with Devolved Administrations, respecting 
improving air quality, health and wellbeing, 
areas of devolved competency, as we work 
addressing inequalities, and tackling 
towards our shared goal of achieving net zero. 
congestion and noise pollution on our roads. 
We will also continue to collaborate with local 
Increased levels of active travel can improve 
authorities and other regional bodies to identify 
everyday life for us all. 
and support local solutions. 
17. We will deliver the Prime Minister’s bold 
15. Depending on progress in the sector, at 
vision for cycling and walking, investing 
some points additional targeted action maybe 
£2 billion over five years with the vision that 
be required, such as steps to reduce use 
half of all journeys in towns and cities will 
of the most polluting cars and tackle urban 
be cycled or walked by 2030. We will also 
congestion, to enable these targets to be 
deliver thousands of miles of safe, continuous, 
met. We will regularly review progress against 
direct routes for cycling in towns and cities, 
our targets – publishing the next transport 
physically separated from pedestrians and 
decarbonisation plan within five years – and 
volume motor traffic along with more low traffic 
continue to adapt and take further action if 
neighbourhoods and school streets.
needed to decarbonise transport.
158Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
18. We will deliver a world class cycling and  Railways
walking network in England by 2040. This will 
23. We will deliver a net zero rail network by 
include comprehensive cycling and walking 
2050, with sustained carbon reductions in 
networks in all large towns and cities, with 
rail along the way. Our ambition is to remove 
measures to enable cycling and walking, such 
all diesel-only trains (passenger and freight) 
as cycle training for all children and adults 
from the network by 2040. We will deploy new 
that want it. We will enable behaviour change 
low-carbon technologies on the network such 
through targeted personal incentives, such 
as hydrogen and battery trains, where they 
as GP prescribing of active travel, existing tax 
make operational and economic sense. We 
reliefs, and rewards programmes.
will incentivise the early take up of low carbon 
Buses and coaches traction by the rail freight industry. 
19. We will deliver the National Bus Strategy’s  24. We will build extra capacity on our rail 
vision of a transformed bus industry and  network to meet growing passenger and 
a green bus revolution. We will make  freight demand and support significant shifts 
buses more frequent, more reliable, more  from road and air to rail. This includes new 
comprehensive, easier to understand and  high-speed lines, reopening lines closed under 
use, better co-ordinated and cheaper – to  the Beeching cuts and significant improvement 
dramatically increase passenger numbers and  to regional city public transport networks with 
reduce congestion and carbon emissions. the aim of making them as good as London’s.
20. We will support delivery of 4,000 new  25. We are working with industry to 
zero emission buses, either battery electric or  modernise fares ticketing and retail and 
hydrogen, and the infrastructure needed to  encourage a shift to rail and cleaner and 
support them. This will be the single largest  greener transport journeys. Great British 
investment ever made in zero emission buses,  Railways set out a transformation in how 
representing the replacement of nearly 12% of  people will pay for their journeys, to encourage 
England’s local operator bus fleet. a shift to rail and cleaner, greener journeys. 
Greater provision of walking and cycling 
21. We will deliver the first All-Electric Bus 
routes to and from stations, and supporting 
City. This will demonstrate what can be 
infrastructure, will be introduced to support 
achieved when there is a real commitment 
healthier greener journeys. Great British 
to move all buses in a place to electric zero 
Railways will encourage more rail freight by 
emission. Coventry has now been announced 
providing the right conditions for industry 
as the UK’s first all-electric bus city, with £50 
growth, with better coordination, modern 
million to fund up to 300 electric buses and 
contracts, and new safeguards.
charging infrastructure.
22. We are consulting on a phase out date for 
the sale of new non-zero emission buses and 
coaches. We have already begun consulting 
on an appropriate date to end the sale of 
new non-zero emission buses and on the 
appropriate supporting policy and regulatory 
framework. We will also consult on a phase 
out date for the sale or purchase of new non-
zero emission coaches.
159Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Cars, vans, motorcycles,  30. We are building a globally competitive UK 
and scooters zero emission vehicle supply chain to ensure 
our automotive sector is at the forefront of 
26. We will end the sale of new petrol and  the transition to net zero. Since 2020, the 
diesel cars and vans by 2030. From 2035 all  government has been actively supporting 
new cars and vans must be fully zero emission  the transformation of the automotive 
at the tailpipe. Between 2030 and 2035, new  supply chain to electrification through the 
cars and vans will only be able to be sold if  Automotive Transformation Fund (ATF). We 
they offer significant zero emission capability. are allocating a further £350 million of our 
up to £1 billion ATF commitment to support 
27. To provide certainty to consumers, 
the electrification of UK vehicles and their 
energy providers, the chargepoint industry, 
supply chains. We will also continue to invest 
vehicle manufacturers and supply chains 
in R&D through the Advanced Propulsion 
during this transition, we will introduce a zero 
Centre (APC) competition to ensure the UK 
emission vehicle mandate setting targets 
remains at the forefront of the development 
requiring a percentage of manufacturers’ new 
and industrialisation of zero emission vehicle 
car and van sales to be zero emission each 
technologies. 
year from 2024.
31. We will consult this year on a phase out 
28. We will continue to regulate the tailpipe 
date of 2035, or earlier if a faster transition 
CO2 emissions of new non-zero emission cars 
appears feasible, for the sale of new non-zero 
and vans to limit their emissions until 100% of 
emission powered two and three wheelers 
new sales are zero emission. This framework 
(and other L category vehicles).
could subsequently be applied to all forms of 
new road vehicles sold in the UK. 32. We will lead by example with 25% of the 
government car fleet ultra low emission by 
29. Between 2030 and 2035, new cars and 
December 2022 and all the government car 
vans will only be able to be sold if they offer 
and van fleet zero emission by 2027.
significant zero emission capability and we will 
provide further detail on the outcome of our  33. We will ensure the UK’s charging 
recent consultation on this shortly. We will then  infrastructure network meets the demands of 
publish a further consultation in early 2022 on:  its users. We have already announced £1.3 
billion of investment to accelerate the rollout 
•  The design of the ZEV mandate (including 
of charging infrastructure on motorways, 
uptake trajectories) and CO2 emissions 
on streets, in homes and workplaces. The 
regulation (as a backstop to ensure 
Government has committed an additional 
standards in the remainder of the fleet are 
£620 million of funding to support the 
maintained); and
transition to electric vehicles. Further details 
•  How and when targets will be set 
will be published in due course. Later this year, 
and enforced.
we will publish an EV infrastructure strategy, 
setting out our vision for infrastructure rollout, 
and roles for the public and private sectors in 
achieving it.
160Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Smart Charging 
Amir is self-employed and uses a van for work. His work involves a lot 
of journeys locally, totalling around 250-300 miles per week. He usually 
plugs into charge every few evenings, with his vehicle fully charged by 
the morning. He has a chargepoint installed on his driveway so he can 
charge on his domestic energy tariff. The chargepoint is smart, which 
means it shifts charging to off-peak times, which saves Amir money. 
He has also signed up to a vehicle-to-grid scheme with his electricity 
supplier. By keeping his van plugged in during the week when he 
doesn’t need to use it, he’s able to sell energy back to the grid when 
demand is high.
Maritime  37. We will extend the Renewable Transport 
Fuel Obligation to the maritime sector. 
34. We will plot a course to net zero for the 
Following consultation earlier this year, we 
UK domestic maritime sector, with indicative 
will make renewable fuels of non-biological 
targets from 2030 and net zero as early as 
origin used in shipping eligible for incentives 
is feasible. We will establish, after public 
under the RTFO.
consultation in 2022, an ambitious ‘Course to 
Zero’. Following consultation, we will establish  38. This year we will be consulting on the 
ambitious indicative targets and embed this  appropriate steps to support and, if needed, 
course in our Clean Maritime Plan. mandate the uptake of shore power in the 
UK. We will consult in winter 2021 on how 
35. We will consult on a potential phase-out 
government can support wider deployment 
date for the sale of new non-zero emission 
of shore power, including potential regulatory 
domestic vessels. Following the conclusion 
interventions, for both vessels and ports.
of the current Clean Maritime Demonstration 
Competition and the Course to Zero  39. We are accelerating the development of 
consultation, we will consult in mid-2022 on  zero emission technology and infrastructure 
the potential for accelerated decarbonisation  in the UK. We have launched the £20 million 
through carefully designed, well signposted  Clean Maritime Demonstration Competition 
measures to phase out the sale of new, non- (CMDC) to fund feasibility studies and 
zero emission domestic vessels. technology trials. We will engage with industry 
to explore establishing a UK Shipping Office 
36. We are assessing how economic 
for Reducing Emissions (UK-SHORE) in 
instruments could be used to accelerate the 
cooperation with UKRI and Innovative UK. 
decarbonisation of the domestic maritime 
UK-SHORE aims to transform the UK into a 
sector. Building on Maritime 2050, the Clean 
global leader in the design and manufacturing 
Maritime Plan and our published research, we 
of clean maritime technology. 
will further investigate the use of economic 
instruments to drive decarbonisation.
161Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Aviation 43. We are currently reviewing the responses 
to the SAF mandate consultation. Ahead 
40. Earlier this year we consulted on our Jet 
of a second consultation in 2022, we will 
Zero Strategy, which will set out the steps we 
continue to engage with industry to ensure our 
will take to reach net zero aviation emissions 
policy can support the delivery of any future 
by 2050. We have also consulted on a 
mandate ambitions.
target for UK domestic aviation to reach net 
zero by 2040. Freight and logistics 
41. We are supporting the development of  44. We recently consulted on phase out 
new and zero carbon UK aircraft technology  dates for the sale of all new non-zero emission 
through the Aerospace Technology Institute  HGVs - that is, on ending the sale of new non-
(ATI) programme and fund zero emission  zero emission HGVs by 2035, for vehicles 26 
flight infrastructure R&D at UK airports. As  tonnes and under, and 2040, for vehicles over 
part of the Jet Zero ambition, the Aerospace  26 tonnes, with the government’s response 
Technology Institute (ATI) provides R&D  due to be published in due course. 
funding, matched by industry, to support the 
45. We will support and encourage modal 
design and development of new aerospace 
shift of freight from road to more sustainable 
technologies, with particular focus on 
alternatives, such as rail, cargo bike and 
zero carbon technologies, that are most 
inland waterways. This will be supported by a 
likely to grow the UK’s share in the global 
package of policies including:
market. We are also investing £3 million in 
2021/22 through the Zero Emission Flight  •  Investing in the capacity and capability of 
Infrastructure competition to accelerate R&D  the rail network for freight, including infill 
into infrastructure requirements at airports  electrification schemes;
and airfields to handle new forms of zero 
•  The Mode Shift Revenue Support and 
emission aircraft.
Waterborne Freight Grant Schemes;
42. We will accelerate the commercialisation  •  Introducing a rail freight growth target; and
of UK sustainable aviation fuels (SAF). Our 
•  ‘Last mile’ measures to support more 
ambition is to enable delivery of 10% SAF by 
sustainable freight in urban areas.
2030 and we will be supporting UK industry 
with a £180 million funding to support the 
development of SAF plants. This builds on 
our recently launched £15 million Green 
Fuels, Green Skies competition. We will also 
establish a SAF clearing house, the first of its 
kind announced in Europe, to enable the UK 
to certify new fuels. 
162Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Delivering decarbonisation  Maximising the benefits of 
through places sustainable low carbon fuels
46. We will support transport decarbonisation  49. As announced in July 2021, and subject 
by investing more than £12 billion in local  to parliamentary approval, the RTFO main 
transport systems over the current Parliament.  obligation will increase from 9.6% in 2021 to 
We will deliver this through existing funding  14.6% in 2032. This is estimated to achieve 
streams where decarbonisation sits alongside  additional carbon savings of up to 20.8 
other core government objectives. MtCO e over this period. The ‘development 
2
fuels’ sub-target, which incentivises specific 
47. We are driving decarbonisation and 
fuels of strategic importance, is already set 
transport improvements at a local level by 
to increase from 0.5% in 2021 to 2.8% by 
making quantifiable carbon reductions a 
2032, and by 2023 we will review whether 
fundamental part of local transport planning 
there is scope to be more ambitious. We also 
and funding. Local Transport Plans (LTPs) – 
committed to additional measures to promote 
statutory requirements that set out holistic 
the uptake of low carbon fuels in the freight, 
place-based strategies for improving 
maritime and aviation sectors and we will work 
transport networks and proposed projects for 
with stakeholders to develop a longer-term 
investment – will need to set out how local 
low carbon fuel strategy for the deployment 
areas will deliver ambitious carbon reductions 
of low carbon fuels across different transport 
in line with carbon budgets and net zero.
modes to 2050.
48. We will embed transport decarbonisation 
Hydrogen in a decarbonised 
principles in spatial planning and across 
transport system
transport policy making. Last year, the 
government set out proposals for a new and 
50. We expanded the RTFO to incentivise 
improved planning system, central to our 
the use of renewable hydrogen in maritime 
most important national challenges, including 
and rail in 2018. As set out clearly in the 
combating climate change and supporting 
recent Hydrogen Strategy and Transport 
sustainable growth. The National Model 
Decarbonisation Plan, hydrogen is likely to 
Design Code, published in July this year, 
play a significant role in transport applications, 
guides local planning authorities on measures 
particularly where energy density requirements 
they can include within their own design 
or refuelling times make it the most suitable 
codes to create environmentally responsive 
low carbon energy source. Our dedicated 
and sustainable places. The National Model 
hydrogen R&D funding and support is 
Design Code provides tools and guidance 
focussed on heavier applications, such as 
for local planning authorities to help ensure 
rail, maritime, aviation and heavy road freight, 
developments respond to the impacts of 
where hydrogen offers in-use advantages 
climate change, are energy efficient, embed 
and the largest global market potential. The 
circular economy principles and reduce 
government remains technology neutral 
carbon emissions.
and acknowledges that there will be other 
transport applications where hydrogen may 
be well suited, including the potential for 
hydrogen to be utilised within combustion 
engines, where it can be shown to produce 
zero harmful emissions at the tailpipe. 
163Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
51. We are investing £3 million in 2021 to  53. We will reduce the barriers to data 
establish the UK’s first multi-modal hydrogen  sharing across the transport sector. Better 
transport hub in Tees Valley. The funding  data can provide new policy and operational 
is kick-starting activity across the region,  insights, drive new products and services 
supporting collaborative R&D pilot projects  and ‘nudge’ people towards lower emission 
and pop-up trials that demonstrate hydrogen  journeys. We recently published a new annual 
technology solutions across transport modes  statistical release, drawing together various 
and forge new industry and academic  data sources on transport’s environmental 
partnerships. impact. Data consumers can use these data, 
without restrictions on use or disclosure, 
Future transport – more choice, 
for journey planning applications, products 
better efficiency and services enabling users to plan green 
end-to-end journeys.
52. We will take action to increase average 
road vehicle occupancy by 2030. Increasing 
car occupancy from 1.55 to 1.7 could save 
nearly 3 Mt of carbon a year by 2030. We are 
building our evidence base to understand the 
barriers and potential policies to increase the 
uptake of shared mobility and will work with 
industry and local authorities to understand 
where further action can be taken.
164Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Working together across the UK
Examples of policy action by the Scottish Government, Welsh Government 
and Northern Ireland Executive
UK Government is working across all  The commitment set out in the Climate 
levels of government and with Devolved  Change Plan to reduce car kilometres by 20% 
Administrations to ensure consistent action to  by 2030 demonstrates the level of ambition 
reduce emissions across the transport sector,  in meeting Scotland’s statutory targets. To 
and across the UK. encourage modal shift to public transport 
the Scottish Government is investing over 
Wales
£500 million in bus priority infrastructure and 
extending nationwide free bus travel to all 
The Welsh Government’s vision is that by 2025 
young people resident in Scotland under 22 
all users of electric cars and vans are confident 
years old from 31 January 2022. On active 
that they can access electric vehicle charging 
travel, the Scottish Government will support 
infrastructure when and where they need it.73 
transformational active travel projects with 
Its Electric Vehicle Charging Strategy identified 
over £500 million of investment over 5 years 
a need for 30,000-55,000 fast chargers and 
and has committed to ensuring that at least 
up to 4,000 rapid chargers by 2030. The 
£320 million or 10% of all the transport capital 
forthcoming EV Charging Action Plan will 
budget is spent on supporting walking, cycling 
include further details on the specific support 
and wheeling by 2024-25.
for the roll out of a comprehensive network. 
On public transport, Scotland’s rail services 
Scotland
will be decarbonised by 2035, and the 
The transport measures in the updated 2018  Scottish Government is working with its 
Climate Change Plan contain action across all  Bus Decarbonisation Taskforce to create 
modes. The Scottish Government will phase  a pathway to zero emission buses. This is 
out the need for new petrol and diesel cars  supported by its long-term investment of over 
and vans by 2030, and will work with public  £500 million in bus priority infrastructure.
bodies to lead the way to do this by 2025. 
It will also work with the freight industry to 
remove the need for new petrol and diesel 
heavy vehicles by 2035, supported by its 
work with Scottish Enterprise to establish a 
Zero Emission Heavy Duty Vehicle programme 
to remove the majority of fossil fuel buses in 
public transport by 2023. 
165Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Northern Ireland
In Northern Ireland, £74 million has been 
invested in the purchase of zero and low 
emission vehicles (hydrogen and electric) 
and associated infrastructure in the public 
transport sector. A £20 million Blue/Green 
infrastructure investment fund was launched in 
2020/21 and has continued in 2021/22, which 
has supported a range of initiatives including 
active travel schemes across Northern Ireland. 
An Executive Energy Strategy is currently 
being developed which will include measures 
focusing on informing transport choices and 
behaviours, and establishing a sustainable 
transport hierarchy that will support changes in 
how we travel, reduce the distances travelled 
in private vehicles, and decarbonise transport.
166Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
3vi. Natural Resources, 
Waste & F-Gases
Harnessing nature for net zero
Our Key Commitments
•  75% of farmers in England will be engaged in low carbon practices by 2030, rising 
to 85% by 2035. Government is introducing farming schemes, including the new 
environmental land management schemes, which will provide a powerful vehicle for 
achieving net zero, and goals of the 25 Year Environment Plan.
•  Increase investment in industry-led research and development into solutions to 
help deliver net zero in agriculture and horticulture, including through the Farming 
Innovation Programme.
•  Treble woodland creation rates by the end of this Parliament, reflecting England’s 
contribution to meeting the UK’s overall target of increasing planting rates to 30,000 
hectares per year by the end of this Parliament and maintain new planting at least 
at this level from 2025 onwards. We will explore a long-term statutory tree target in 
England within the public consultation on Environment Bill targets. 
•  We will boost the existing £640 million Nature for Climate Fund with a further 
£124 million of new money, ensuring total spend of more than £750 million by 
2025 on peat restoration, woodland creation and management. This will enable 
more opportunities for farmers and landowners to support net zero through land 
use change.
•  Restore at least 35,000 hectares of peatlands in Englad by 2025, through the 
Nature for Climate Fund. Restore approximately 280,000 hectares of peat 
in England by 2050, including via funding from the new environmental land 
management schemes.
•  Mobilise private investment into tree planting, including through the Woodland 
Carbon Code, with the support of government’s Woodland Carbon Guarantee, 
and into peat restoration through implementing a package of reforms to the 
Peatland Code.
•  We will work with key stakeholders to develop a policy roadmap to increase the 
use of timber in construction in England, and will create a cross-government and 
industry working group tasked with identifying key actions to safely increase timber 
use and reduce embodied carbon.
167Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
•  To support our commitment to explore options for the near elimination of 
biodegradable municipal waste to landfill from 2028, we are bringing forward £295 
million of capital funding which will allow local authorities in England to prepare to 
implement free separate food waste collections for all households from 2025.
•  Complete a review of the F-gas Regulation and assess whether we can go further 
than the current requirements and international commitments, including by looking 
at what additional reductions in F-gas use can be made to help the UK meet net 
zero by 2050.
•  Through the Environment Bill we will legislate for Local Nature Recovery Strategies – 
a new system of spatial strategies that will map proposals for improving or creating 
habitat for nature and wider environmental benefits, helping to deliver net zero 
objectives.
•  Biodiversity co-benefits and other environmental objectives are maximised alongside 
decarbonisation.
Progress to date
1. This chapter covers natural resources  4. Emissions from agriculture, mainly 
including agriculture, forestry, and other land  stemming from livestock, agricultural soils, 
use (AFOLU), (inclusive of peatlands and soils),  and farm machinery, added up to 55 MtCO e 
2
as well as resources, waste, wastewater,  (11%) of UK emissions in 2019. Although 
and fluorinated gases (F-gases). In 2019, net  rising by 1% from 2018 to 2019, agricultural 
UK greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions from  emissions have fallen by 13% since 1990. 
these sectors, referred to as NRWF (natural  The Agriculture Transition Plan (2020) sets 
resources, waste, and F-gases), reflected  out how we will move away from the EU’s 
103 MtCO e or 20% of the UK total, having  Common Agricultural Policy to use public 
2
decreased by 45% between 1990 and 2019.74 money to reward farmers and land managers 
for delivering environmentally sustainable 
2. In the Ten Point Plan, we committed to 
outcomes in England.75
protecting our natural environment. Since 
then we have launched the floods investment  5. Forestry and woodlands currently act 
programme to better protect 336,000  as carbon sinks and, in 2019, captured 
properties from flooding. We also awarded  about 4% of our emissions.76 Since 2010, 
90 projects grants under round 2 of the  123,000 hectares of new woodland has been 
£80 million Green Recovery Challenge Fund  planted across the UK, an area equivalent to 
(GRCF). In total, the GRCF is set to plant  Bedfordshire. The England Tree Action Plan 
almost over 1 million trees. (2021) committed to increasing tree planting 
rates from 13,410 hectares across the UK 
Agriculture, forestry, and other land 
in 2020/21, to 30,000 hectares each year 
use (AFOLU) by the end of this Parliament. The plan is 
supported by £500 million of the Nature for 
3. AFOLU were responsible for 63 MtCO e 
2 Climate Fund. In 2020-21 we funded new 
(12%) of UK net GHG emissions in 2019, 
partnerships with Northumberland County 
having risen slightly in the last 2 years but 
Council, Trees 4 Cornwall, and England’s 
reduced by 24% since 1990.
network of ten Community Forests. Two new 
168Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
community forests were launched, Plymouth  reduction in biodegradable waste to landfill. 
and South Devon in June 2021 and North- The Resources and Waste Strategy (RWS), 
East, in July 2021. (2018) set out how we will transition to a 
more circular economy, and included key 
6. Although peatlands are the UK’s largest 
reforms to enable us to manage our waste 
terrestrial carbon store, in a degraded 
more efficiently, reduce the amount of waste 
condition they represent a net source of 
we create as a society, and ensure we use 
emissions. In 2019, peatlands emitted 4% 
resources more efficiently.77 
of UK net GHG emissions, having become 
degraded due to drainage for agricultural use,  8. F-gases (GHGs which can be used 
overgrazing and burning. We have rewetted  in systems such as heat pumps and air 
around 100,000 hectares of peatland across  conditioning units) accounted for 15 MtCO e 
2
the UK and set out further plans for peatland  (3%) of UK emissions in 2019, with 93% 
restoration and responsible management in  of these coming from hydrofluorocarbons 
the England Peat Action Plan (May 2021). (HFCs). F-gas emissions have fallen by 10% 
since 1990.78 In 2017, the UK was one of 
Resources, waste, and F-gases
the first countries to commit to cutting HFC 
consumption by 85% by 2036, ratifying 
7. Waste management emissions consist 
the Kigali Amendment to the UN Montreal 
of waste disposed to landfill sites, waste 
Protocol.79 We have cut HFC consumption 
incineration without energy recovery, and 
even faster than that, reducing levels placed 
the treatment of wastewater. In 2019, waste 
on the market by 55% since 2015, through 
management accounted for 25 MtCO e 
2 quota limits.80 
(5%) of UK emissions, a significant decrease 
of 71% since 1990, largely driven by a 
Net zero transition and economic opportunities 
Our 2050 vision and how we  10. By 2050, emissions associated with 
the NRWF sectors could need to drop by 
get there 
67-75% compared to 2019, down to 26-34 
9. A systemic transformation across the  MtCO e. In the interim, to meet our NDC and 
2
UK economy, including NRWF sectors, is  Carbon Budget 6 targets, they are expected 
required to achieve net zero by 2050. While  to fall by 30-40% by 2030 and 39-51% by 
we will significantly reduce emissions across  2035, compared to 2019 levels. These figures 
the NRWF sectors, some residual emissions  are based on the indicative NWRF sectoral 
from agriculture, waste, and F-gases will  pathway to help us reach net zero and interim 
remain. These will need to be compensated  targets. Our potential pathway also indicates 
for by both nature-based and engineered  residual emissions in AFOLU sectors could 
greenhouse gas removals (GGRs) as a last  need to fall by 17-30% by 2030 and 24-40% 
resort. On our journey to net zero, we will  by 2035, relative to 2019 levels; waste and 
maximise opportunities to adapt to climate  F-gas emissions could need to fall by 50-57% 
change and the extreme weather it brings,  by 2030 and by 62-69% by 2035, relative to 
and to maximise the co-benefits for other  2019 levels.
environmental objectives.
169Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
11. We are working closely with Devolved  forums, and allows us to think practically 
Administrations to deliver this ambition. This  about how we deliver across the UK. We will 
includes frequent engagement at Ministerial  also consider the interdependencies between 
and official levels through existing and new  land use sectors and other goals.
Figure 23: Indicative agriculture, forestry and other land use emissions 
pathway to 2037
90
80
70
Pre-NZS policies
e) 60
2
O
C
t 50
M
 (
s
n 40 NZS delivery
o pathway
si
s
mi 30
2050
E
Range
20
10
0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Source: BEIS analysis 
170Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Figure 24 Indicative waste and F-gas emissions pathway to 2037
120
100
e) 80
2
O
C
t
M
 ( 60
s
n
o
si
s
mi 40
E
Pre-NZS policies 2050
20
Range
NZS delivery
pathway
0
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
Source: BEIS analysis 
Agriculture, forestry, and other land  13. We will support farmers to adopt low 
carbon farming practices, and increase the 
use (AFOLU)
carbon stored on their farms, helping to 
12. By 2050, we will have a resilient and  improve business productivity and profitability 
prosperous countryside, where farmers and  gains. Schemes that support environmental 
land managers are supported to reduce  land management will help drive this change 
emissions and deliver a range of environmental  and will also help compensate for residual 
outcomes. 75% of farmers in England will be  emissions that are harder to reduce, such as 
engaged in low carbon practices by 2030,  from livestock. The Farming Investment Fund 
rising to 85% by 2035. Emissions mitigation  will offer funding for equipment, technology, 
in agriculture is complex and diverse, with no  and infrastructure that improves farm 
silver bullets. It is difficult to establish a single  productivity and benefits the environment. 
metric to track progress, but government  We are also providing funding to help farmers 
monitors engagement with low carbon farming  produce healthier animals, reduce GHG 
practices through our Farm Practice Survey.  emissions and enhance welfare through 
We will continue to improve this metric in  the Animal Health and Welfare Pathway. 
future years to address what we consider to  Additionally, Defra will develop a Farming for 
be key limitations in the current approach. Net Zero resource, providing advice to farmers 
on good practice techniques to understand, 
manage and abate GHG emissions. 
171Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
14. We also recognise the importance of  Resources and waste, and F-gases
other policy levers with potential climate 
16. By 2050, we will have met the 25 Year 
benefits, for example Environmental Permitting 
Environment Plan (25YEP) commitments 
for dairy and intensive beef herds which is 
to eliminate all avoidable waste, including 
planned under the Clean Air Strategy. There 
plastic, and to double resource productivity.81 
is also an important role for emerging markets 
A circular economy will be part of everyday 
in nature-based solutions. For example, the 
life: reusing, repairing, and remanufacturing 
Woodland Carbon Code, which incorporates 
goods will be standard practice. Goods will 
robust standards and accreditation processes. 
be designed to last for longer and be more 
We will seek to establish a robust market 
efficient. At end of life, the vast majority of 
framework, with arrangements to ensure 
products will be sent for recycling, with food, 
additionality, transparency, and traceability 
garden, and dry materials collected separately 
of carbon credits, so that regulators and the 
and used as lower carbon inputs for new 
public can be confident that carbon savings 
products. Producer responsibility schemes 
are verified and also guaranteed against 
will be embedded across the economy. Any 
future issues such as forest fires or disease. 
non-recyclable residual waste will be treated to 
Additionally, we continue to consider the 
enable the processing of waste into valuable 
impact that climate change will have on the 
outputs, such as energy. Where possible, 
suitability of our land for different uses, such 
these processes would include carbon capture 
as the impact of hotter, drier summers and 
and storage. (See the Power chapter for more 
warmer, wetter winters on agriculture, habitat 
on energy from waste.) Only where no such 
creation and restoration, and forestry. 
treatment is possible may landfill be permitted. 
15. Biomass will also be an important 
17. By 2050, current F-gas use will have been 
component of our pathway to net zero. It 
predominantly replaced by alternative gases 
is likely that the UK will be producing more 
or technologies. HFC importers, equipment 
domestic perennial energy crops (such as 
manufacturers and servicing technicians will 
miscanthus and short rotation coppice) 
have taken steps to reduce their use in favour 
and short rotation forestry than today, but 
of alternatives, not only in line with the current 
the exact role is yet to be determined. The 
phasedown, but also with further measures 
Biomass Strategy, due in 2022, will look to 
implemented following the F-gas Regulation 
address this. The sustainability, and wider 
review and future international changes.
environmental impact of growing and using 
biomass, including on air quality, will be key 
factors in establishing its role. 
172Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Other sectors as for carbon sequestration. We do not 
currently have the required data to include 
18. Protecting, restoring, and sustainably 
these habitats in the UK GHG Inventory or to 
managing other natural resources such as 
accurately quantify their potential contribution 
soils or blue carbon habitats like saltmarsh 
to net zero but are doing further work to close 
and seagrass, can provide benefits for 
these evidence gaps.
biodiversity and climate adaptation, as well 
Reducing emissions while balancing other climate and 
environmental objectives
While reducing emissions, we must also adapt to the inevitable changes in our climate, 
ensuring that policies supporting net zero are resilient to current and future climate risks, 
and preventing locking in future vulnerabilities or maladaptation. The second National 
Adaptation Programme sets out how we are addressing, and will address, climate risks 
between 2018 and 2023 and further detail on adaptation is included in the Climate Science 
Annex of this strategy.
Delivering net zero creates opportunities to benefit other environmental objectives too. For 
example, climate change and biodiversity loss are closely related, and policies to tackle 
climate change can help to improve biodiversity. Likewise, net zero policies can support 
further environmental goals, such as water quality, natural beauty, and the delivery of 
the 25YEP. For example, we will ensure afforestation across England and that the right 
species of tree is planted in the right place, benefitting flood management, soil health 
and biodiversity, while also sequestering carbon. In some cases, however, we know it will 
be important to manage potential misalignments: for example, ammonia emissions from 
digestate, a by-product from the process of anaerobic digestion, can negatively impact 
human health and cause biodiversity loss. We are working to mitigate ammonia emissions 
through the Green Gas Support Scheme, which will require participants to take additional 
steps to mitigate ammonia emissions, and by researching technologies that can help 
reduce the negative environmental impacts of digestate. The relationship between net zero 
and wider environmental objectives, including air quality, is set out in more detail in the 
Technical Annex.
173Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
The UK has a limited amount of land and delivering net zero will require changes to the way 
this land is used, for example, for afforestation, biomass production, and peat restoration. 
Opportunities for land to be used for multiple purposes, such as agroforestry will help 
to make sure land use for decarbonisation purposes is balanced with other demands, 
such as housing development and food production. These changes are likely to have 
varying effects on wider environmental outcomes and may completely alter the character 
of some landscapes and rural livelihoods (see section below). Land use change must be 
designed in a systemic, geographically targeted way with appropriate local governance 
and delivery structures which consider the complex range of interacting social, economic, 
and demographic factors. To support this, government is developing a Net Zero Systems 
Tool which aims to allow key decision makers to gain new insights and understanding, 
by highlighting dependencies and trade-offs within the land use system, as well as 
by demonstrating the knock-on effects of proposed policies. In addition, through the 
Environment Bill, the Government is introducing Local Nature Recovery Strategies (LNRS), 
a spatial planning tool for nature, allowing local government and communities to identify 
priorities and opportunities for nature recovery and nature-based solutions across England. 
The Bill includes a specific duty on all public authorities to “have regard” to relevant LNRSs 
and the spatial information they provide will support the development of local plans and 
other land use change incentives. Delivery of priorities and opportunities identified in LNRS 
will be supported by a range of delivery mechanisms including our environmental land 
management schemes, and in particular, the Local Nature Recovery scheme. By 2028, 
Defra’s current plans are for total spend to be evenly split between farm-level, locally 
tailored, and landscape-scale investment within ELM
Seizing new opportunities  21. Decarbonising the NRWF sectors will 
regenerate communities and open up new 
19. Reducing emissions will create growth 
employment opportunities right around the 
and employment opportunities across 
UK. For example, an increase in afforestation 
NRWF sectors, and it is important that these 
across England could support up to 1,900 
opportunities are evenly felt and realised by 
jobs in 2024 and up to 2,000 jobs in 2030. 
all. Achieving net zero will require innovation 
By investing in rural infrastructure and skills 
from businesses and landowners, investment 
development we will seek to ensure rural 
from government and the private sector, and 
communities and rural businesses, including 
changes in our choices as consumers. We 
the most disadvantaged, benefit from net 
want to create domestic and international 
zero. There will be significant opportunities 
demand for our low carbon, high welfare and 
for upskilling, reskilling, and starting new 
world-renowned produce, whilst supporting 
career paths, alongside expanding current 
international markets for sustainably 
sectors. For example, nature-based solutions 
produced commodities.
create entry-level opportunities for people 
just starting out, as well as requiring specialist 
20. To achieve the level of emissions 
skills such as hydrology, ecology and forest 
reductions in the NRWF sector indicated by 
management. By delivering long-term policy 
our delivery pathway to 2037, we will need 
certainty, we will unlock the private investment 
additional public and private investment 
necessary to deliver these green jobs. 
of approximately £30 billion. Given the 
importance of R&D to deliver our pathway, we 
are committing to spend £75 million on net 
zero related R&D across the NRWF sectors 
over the next three years.
174Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
22. Innovation will also be vital to delivering  23. Innovation is key to other NRWF 
net zero and maximising benefits for the UK. In  sectors too. Industry is responding to the 
agriculture, farmers will be able to adopt new  HFC phasedown by switching to alternative 
emission saving technologies, produce lower  gases and technologies in areas such as 
carbon foods and steward the land in new  refrigeration, air conditioning, and heat pumps, 
ways, such as through vertical farming. This  and will continue to innovate in this area. 
will allow them to diversify income streams and  The UK Research and Innovation’s National 
produce high quality, low carbon produce for  Interdisciplinary Circular Economy Research 
domestic and international markets, boosting  programme is looking at how to transition to 
the rural economy. Investment in agricultural  a more circular economy. Producers will need 
innovation, through schemes like the Farming  to move to more sustainable product design, 
Innovation Programme, will drive development  and consumers, with support from the public 
of new precision technologies, explore the  and private sectors, will need to shift to more 
potential of robotics and artificial intelligence,  sustainable product choices and towards 
and take advantage of developments in  reusing, repairing, remanufacturing, and 
breeding technologies, including the potential  recycling products. 
of gene editing. This can also make our 
agricultural sector more resilient to the impacts 
Policies and proposals 
of climate change and safeguard our food 
security. We also know other technological 
solutions, such as those to reduce emissions 
Agriculture, forestry, and other land 
from non-road mobile machinery in the 
use (AFOLU)
agricultural sector require further development. 
Cross government work is required to develop 
24. We have begun the Agricultural Transition 
non-road mobile machinery policies to support 
Period and have moved away from the 
the deployment of technological solutions 
CAP. We are reducing and then stopping 
and required infrastructure in specific sectors, 
untargeted Direct Payments in England and 
including industry, transport, and buildings.  
moving to a system where public money 
Relevant government departments will work 
rewards farmers and land managers for 
together to ensure a coherent approach (see 
environmentally sustainable actions, including 
the Industry chapter). A significant market 
reducing emissions and expanding the 
share for innovations such as alternative 
carbon sequestration potential of our land. 
proteins will take time to materialise, but will 
We will introduce three environmental land 
align with consumer dietary trends, and the 
management schemes: the Sustainable 
UK already has a lively and growing domestic 
Farming Incentive (SFI), Local Nature Recovery 
market that could grow to become another 
(LNR) and Landscape Recovery (LR). The SFI 
great British food export that competes 
will be open to all farmers and will incentivise 
internationally. These and other novel methods 
low carbon practices, for example, soil and 
of food production could create significant 
nutrient management. LNR will fund actions 
opportunities to further promote high quality 
that support local nature recovery and 
British food internationally. 
deliver local environmental priorities. The LR 
scheme will fund long-term land use change 
projects such as large-scale tree planting, 
and peatland restoration projects. Net zero 
will be a key priority across the delivery of our 
environmental land management schemes.
175Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
25. Take up of these schemes will be  Agriculture 
voluntary and will require a shift in the 
28. Government will support a range of 
practices of landowners and farmers. We are 
measures to decarbonise the agriculture 
working to ensure the schemes encourage 
sector specifically, including by providing 
participation, including through appropriate 
further funding to support farmers to take 
payment rates, in line with the Payment 
up low carbon practices and technologies. 
Principles.82 Participants will still be able 
We will introduce a targeted set of financial 
to benefit from private sector funding, for 
incentives to improve animal health and 
delivering additional benefits. Advice and 
welfare and reduce emissions from animals, 
guidance will also be provided to support 
including action to identify and eliminate 
participants to adopt new practices. Tests 
bovine viral diarrhoea, with pilots starting 
and trials for the schemes began in 2020. 
in late 2022 or early 2023. The Farming 
The scheme will be rolled out in full by 2024.83 
Investment Fund will provide further grants to 
Government has committed to maintain 
farmers, enabling them to invest in equipment, 
current levels of spending on the sector in 
technology and infrastructure that will improve 
England, based on 2019 levels, until 2024/5, 
their profitability and benefit the environment. 
amounting to an average of £2.4 billion a year.
The scheme will be launched in 2021. 
26. We are also supporting the acceleration  From 2022, Government will also provide 
of private investment in nature through  grants for new slurry stores, equipment, 
initiatives such as the Natural Environment  and other interventions. The primary goal 
Investment Readiness Fund. These will test  will be delivering reductions in nitrate and 
new models and build pipelines of investable  ammonia pollutants from slurry, a key cause 
nature projects by providing technical  of pollution on farms, but the grants will also 
assistance and capacity building support to  reduce methane emissions and protect and 
create opportunities for private investment.  restore habitats.
Projects will capture the value of the carbon 
29. We will increase investment in 
and other benefits provided by natural assets 
industry-led research and development into 
such as woodlands, peatlands wetlands 
productivity challenges, delivering net zero 
and river catchments. They will create multi-
and testing new technologies and methods. 
functional landscapes that deliver diverse 
The Farming Innovation Programme will 
benefits, providing a return on investment and 
open for applications in October 2021 with 
improving our understanding of how to attract 
further competitions planned for 2022 and 
private investment. 
beyond. These will bring together interested 
27. We will boost the existing £640 million  farmers, scientists, and researchers to tackle 
Nature for Climate Fund with a further  productivity and environmental challenges. We 
£124 million of new money, ensuring total  will invest in supporting knowledge exchange 
spend of more than £750 million by 2025  so more farmers and growers have access to 
on peat restoration, woodland creation  the latest findings from cutting-edge research 
and management. This will enable more  that they can apply on their farms.
opportunities for farmers and landowners to 
support net zero through land use change.
176Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
30. We will encourage and support increased  33. The Government’s upcoming Food 
agroforestry (trees and agriculture coexisting  Strategy will support the delivery of net zero, 
on the same land) through our environmental  nature recovery, and biodiversity commitments 
land management schemes from the early  and will help to create a food system that 
2020s, enabling agricultural land to sequester  incentivises farmers to produce high quality, 
emissions while delivering other environmental  high welfare food in the most sustainable way. 
benefits, such as air quality and biodiversity,  Government is exploring options to reduce 
and providing alternative income streams for  carbon emissions from food production, 
farmers from trees.  support innovation in the food sector, 
incentivise land use change to sequester more 
31. Government is working, and will continue 
carbon, and preserve natural resources.
to work, in partnership with the sector to 
develop a new outcome-focused approach to  34. Government is also committed to 
regulation and enforcement which supports  exploring the monitoring, reporting, and 
net zero. For example, ruminant livestock are  verification of emissions in the agriculture 
the leading cause of farm emissions, but feed  sector. This will enable us to understand where 
additives with methane inhibiting properties  the greatest decarbonisation opportunities 
have the potential to reduce emissions,  could be across the sector, considering all 
especially from housed cattle. Whilst this is an  options. We will continue to review potential 
emerging technology, government is actively  carbon pricing strategies for land use sectors, 
investigating the promising role these products  including the potential role for voluntary or 
may have in delivering emissions savings in  compliance carbon markets to support cost 
the mid-term, including by assessing whether  effective decarbonisation for the sector.
regulation could ensure maximised take up of 
Peat 
such products. 
35. The England Peat Action Plan (EPAP) 
32. We will also consider how best to reduce 
sets out the government’s long-term vision for 
and better target the use of manufactured 
managing, protecting, and restoring peatlands 
fertiliser, including exploring the potential of 
so that they provide a wide range of benefits 
regulation in this area. In addition, we are 
to wildlife, people and the planet. 
considering whether we need new legislative 
powers to improve soil management and 
36. Tackling the drivers of peatland 
nutrient management. We will consider the 
degradation is essential. The EPAP commits 
recommendations of the Nutrient Management 
to ending the horticultural use of peat in the 
Expert Group, due to report in spring 2022, 
amateur sector by the end of this parliament 
on the optimal policy approaches to minimise 
and a consultation will be launched on 
emissions from fertiliser use. 
potential legislative measures (e.g. a sales ban) 
in 2021. Legislation to end managed burning 
on protected blanket bog that is 40 cm deep 
or more, unless covered by a license, has 
already been laid, protecting 40% of England’s 
blanket bog, and government is committed 
to reviewing the economic and environmental 
case for extending protections. 
177Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
37. At least 35,000 ha of peatlands in England  statutory tree target in England within the 
will be restored, by 2025, via the Nature for  public consultation on Environment Bill targets. 
Climate Fund. From 2024, public funding  We intent to spend over £500 million of the 
for peatland restoration will be available in  Nature for Climate Fund on funding woodland 
England through the new environmental  creation and management in England until 
land management schemes. To further  2025, beyond which the new environmental 
support peatland restoration, government  land management schemes will provide the 
is implementing a range of policies that will  main source of public funding. Whilst this 
mobilise private investment. The Natural  rate of planting will lead to a relatively small 
Environment Investment Readiness Fund has  emission savings in the short-medium term, 
been launched and a package of reforms  it will play an increasingly important role as 
to the Peatland Code, including expanding  time goes on, while also providing other 
it to cover more peatland types, will be  environmental benefits.
implemented in 2022. We will aim to restore 
40. Private finance for tree planting and 
approximately 280,000 ha of peatland in 
management is being generated via the 
England by 2050.
Woodland Carbon Code with the support of 
38. Degraded lowland peat is responsible  government’s Woodland Carbon Guarantee. 
for 86% of England’s peatland emissions.  Government has also launched a new England 
Full restoration may not always be desirable,  Woodland Creation Offer to fund woodland 
due to the lowlands’ agricultural value and  creation in England and will establish new 
interactions with landscape scale water  Woodland Creation Partnerships in key areas, 
level management regimes. Where it is not  bringing together government, NGOs, and the 
possible to restore peatlands, we will support  private sector to develop bespoke offers to 
new responsible management measures for  encourage woodland creation. 
lowland peatlands.The Lowland Agriculture 
41. The government will review guidance on 
Peat Taskforce will provide recommendations 
the tax treatment of trees and woodlands, to 
in summer 2022 on how to improve the 
provide greater clarity to landowners on how 
condition of lowland farmed peatlands, both 
new and existing trees on their land affect tax 
to reduce emissions and support continued 
liabilities. Further, government will regulate to 
profitable agriculture. From 2024, our Local 
improve protections for existing woodlands 
Nature Recovery scheme will provide a key 
and increase the number of woodlands under 
funding stream for wetter modes of farming, 
active management, improving resilience to 
including paludiculture. To prevent delay, 
natural hazards.
our Farming Innovation Programme will be 
open to supporting applications for R&D in  42. Felled trees store carbon within them and 
paludiculture from the 20 October 2021,  timber has the lowest embodied carbon of 
with more competitions to follow in 2022  any mainstream building materials. Guided 
and beyond. by market analysis, fire safety and structural 
considerations, key opportunities for the 
Forestry and woodlands
safe growth of timber use will be in low-rise 
39. We will treble woodland creation rates by  buildings using traditional and certain modern 
the end of this Parliament, reflecting England’s  methods of construction, and in a wide range 
contribution to meeting the UK’s overall target  of commercial and non-residential settings. 
of increasing planting rates to 30,000 hectares  We will promote the safe use of timber in 
per year by the end of this Parliament, and  construction through several measures, 
maintain new planting at least at this level from  including by:
2025 onwards. We will explore a long-term 
178Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
•  Providing financial support to develop  Resources, waste and F-gases
innovative timber products through the 
Forestry Innovation Fund;  Resources and waste
•  Working with key construction  44. The Government’s Resources and Waste 
stakeholders, including the Green  Strategy (RWS) set out the overall ambition 
Construction Board, Construction  and direction of travel for the waste sector. 
Leadership Council, Home Builders  It made a commitment to increase municipal 
Federation, and Federation of Master  recycling rates to 65% and to ensure that 
Builders to develop a policy roadmap on  no more than 10% of municipal waste is 
use of timber; landfilled by 2035. Biodegradable waste 
•  Driving an increase in the use of certain  sent to landfill today, however, slowly breaks 
modern methods of construction, some  down anaerobically, emitting methane for 
forms of which can encourage use of  many years afterwards. Faster action will 
sustainable materials such as timber; mean greater emissions savings. We will 
therefore explore policies to work towards the 
•  Working with Homes England and delivery 
near elimination of biodegradable municipal 
partners to explore ways to increase timber 
waste to landfill by 2028. To support this 
use in the delivery of housing programmes;
commitment, we are bringing forward £295 
•  Increasing public demand for sustainably 
million of capital funding which will allow local 
sourced timber through procurement 
authorities in England to prepare to implement 
policies; and
free separate food waste collections for all 
•  Encouraging research into barriers to  households from 2025.
uptake of timber, including looking at 
45. To work towards these goals, we are 
timber strength grades and the fire 
delivering the reforms announced in the 
resistance of engineered timber structures.
RWS. Consistent collections of household 
Biomass  and business waste will be introduced via the 
Environment Bill. The powers will allow us to 
43.  Government will publish a Biomass 
require local authorities to separately collect 
Strategy in 2022 which we will set out 
a core set of materials for recycling, including 
the results of a review of the amount of 
paper and card, glass, metal, plastic, food 
sustainable biomass available to the UK 
waste and household garden waste. This will 
(including domestically grown  perennial 
divert significant volumes of biodegradable 
energy crops and short-rotation forestry), 
waste from landfill and provide a high volume 
and how this resource could be best utilised 
of emissions savings. A deposit return scheme 
across the economy to help achieve net 
for drinks containers and extended producer 
zero. The strategy will set out the role which 
responsibility for packaging, placing the net 
Bioenergy with Carbon Capture & Storage 
costs of disposing of packaging on producers, 
(BECCS) can play in reducing carbon 
will also be introduced. These two measures 
emissions and how the technology could 
will increase the volume of materials being 
be deployed. It will also consider where and 
recycled and decrease our consumption 
how we can improve our existing biomass 
of virgin materials, thereby reducing the 
sustainability standards (already some of 
amount of waste sent to landfill and reducing 
the world’s most stringent) and examine the 
emissions from other sectors. 
relationship between biomass, including how it 
is used, and our wider environmental targets, 
including air quality. 
179Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
46. Complementing these measures, the  48. Government is also committed to 
introduction of the plastic packaging tax  eliminating food waste to landfill and delivering 
from April 2022 will encourage greater use  the UN Sustainable Development Goal 12.3 to 
of recycled plastic in plastic packaging,  halve food waste by 2030. The Environment 
instead of new (virgin) plastic. The tax will  Bill will require all local authorities in England 
be charged at £200 per tonne and be paid  to separately collect household food waste, 
by manufacturers and importers of plastic  preventing it from being sent to landfill. This 
packaging that contains less than 30%  will create carbon savings and support the 
recycled plastic. It is estimated that this will  shift to a circular economy, as food waste is 
lead to an increase in the use of recycled  instead turned into biogas and digestate (a 
plastic by 40% in 2022-23, equal to carbon  soil improver) through anaerobic digestion. 
savings of nearly 200,000 tonnes of CO2  In addition, government will continue to work 
emissions. The government will also review  with Waste and Resources Action Programme 
aspects of the Landfill Tax in England and  (WRAP) and industry, and to support the 
Northern Ireland in due course, as announced  Courtauld 2030 voluntary agreement with 
in Spring 2021. This will ensure the tax  food and drink businesses, the Food Waste 
continues to support the government’s  Reduction Roadmap, and the Target Measure 
ambitious environmental objectives. Act approach, as well as campaigns in the 
public and private sector to reduce food 
47. Government is committed to moving 
waste, including the annual Food Waste 
to a more circular economy. This means 
Action Week. 
keeping built assets, products, and materials 
in use for longer, including through repair  49. Wastewater emissions will decrease 
and reuse, and making greater use of  due to improved treatment processes and 
secondary materials, thus reducing waste  expected data improvements. Water company 
arising. Recycling and material substitution,  research and investment into reducing 
especially of carbon intensive materials  process emissions from wastewater treatment 
such as steel, aluminium, and cement, are  plants will result in reductions in municipal 
also an important part of our approach.  process emissions via alternative treatment 
The draft Waste Prevention Programme  processes such as anaerobic treatment, 
for England (WPP) (recently consulted on)  membrane activated biofilm reactors, 
sets out the overall approach to improving  alternative ammonia removal processes and 
resource efficiency across key sectors  nature-based solutions. Improvements in the 
and announced government’s intention to  way companies, and government, report on 
consult on introducing extended producer  industrial emissions, and the way they are 
responsibility in other areas, including textiles.  calculated, are also likely to result in reductions 
The Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy,  to the values on record.
meanwhile, outlines our high-level ambition for 
resource efficiency measures across industry. 
At least one legislative target in the area of 
resource efficiency and waste reduction will 
be set under the Environment Bill. For further 
information on our plans for resource efficient 
manufacturing see the Industry chapter.
180Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
F-gases 51. A review of the F-gas Regulation has 
commenced and is due to complete no 
50. Government will continue to impose 
later than 2022. This will be used to assess 
the requirements of the F-gas Regulation, 
whether we can go further than the current 
which covers England, Wales and Scotland. 
requirements and international commitments, 
The regulation requires a range of measures 
including by looking at what additional 
to reduce emissions, including controls on 
reductions in F-gas use can be made to help 
gas placed on the market, product bans, 
the UK meet net zero by 2050.
leak checks and mandatory certification for 
handlers of F-gases. These actions will help 
us to meet the Kigali Amendment target of 
reducing HFC consumption by 85% by 2036, 
as well as the F-gas Regulation’s target of a 
79% reduction by 2030. 
181Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Working together across the UK 
Examples of policy action by the Scottish Government, Welsh Government 
and Northern Ireland Executive 
UK Government is working across all  Scotland 
levels of government and with Devolved 
The Scottish Government has set ambitious 
Administrations to ensure consistent action 
targets to restore 250,000 ha of peatland by 
to reduce emissions across the Natural 
2030 and for 18,000 ha of new woodlands 
Resources, Waste and F-Gases sectors, and 
to be created annually by 2024/25, with 
across the UK.
woodland cover increased from around 
Wales  19% to 21% of the total area of Scotland 
by 2032. Scottish Forestry and Forestry 
In November 2020, the Welsh Government 
and Land Scotland will work with investors, 
published its National Peatland Action 
carbon buyers, landowners, and market 
Programme to target peatland bodies most in 
intermediaries to increase private investment 
need of restoration, with the aim of delivering 
in new woodlands to increase the woodland 
600-800 ha of restoration per year.84 It will 
carbon market by at least 50% by 2025.
also safeguard those in good and recovering 
condition. Activity will be delivered by Natural  I n its recent Programme for Government, the 
Resources Wales and partners across a range  Scottish Government allocated an additional 
of land uses on both private and public land.  £150 million for forestry and woodland 
creation: Scottish Forestry will use £100 
When the Senedd first sat in 1999, Wales 
million of this to support new tree planting; 
recycled less than 5% of its municipal waste. 
and Forestry and Land Scotland will use 
In 2020, Wales highest ever recycling rate 
£30 million to expand Scotland’s national 
of over 65% put it third in the world, with 
forests and land, and £20 million to invest in 
403,000 tonnes of CO  avoided in 2019/20.
2 modernising nursery facilities to increase tree 
This success is due to a truly collective  production. 
effort by local authorities, communities and 
A new Scottish Agriculture Bill will be brought 
households, while the Welsh Government has 
forward in 2023 to replace the EU Common 
set targets and funded infrastructure. Food 
Agricultural Policy. Co-development and 
waste is collected from every household and 
co-design with rural partners will be central 
recycling centres are evolving into modern 
to the development of future support 
eco-parks where businesses and enterprises 
structures and delivery. The Agriculture Reform 
capture the value in materials and keep 
Implementation Oversight Board (ARIOB) will 
resources in use.
be asked to incorporate recommendations 
from farmer-led groups, into the work 
implementing policy reform. These groups 
were established to develop proposals to 
cut emissions across agriculture, support 
sustainable and high quality food production, 
and design a new support system. A 
preliminary package of funded measures will 
be agreed COP26, and the ARIOB will also 
consider responses to the public consultation 
launched in August on the same themes.
182Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Northern Ireland
The Forests for our Future Programme aims 
to plant 18 million trees by 2030 to create 
9,000 ha of new woodland. The programme 
will improve the resilience of Northern 
Ireland’s forests and woodlands and increase 
their contribution to a sustainable, healthy 
environment; increase the contribution of 
forests and woodlands to Northern Ireland’s 
sustainable and inclusive economic growth; 
and increase the use of Northern Ireland’s 
forest resources to enable more people 
to improve their health, wellbeing, and 
life chances.
Legislative provisions to help to limit emissions 
from F-gases (which have a high greenhouse 
warming potential) and ozone depleting 
substances have also been brought into 
operation in Northern Ireland.
183Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
3vii. Greenhouse Gas Removals
Balancing residual emissions to achieve net zero
Our Key Commitments
•  Set the ambition of deploying at least 5 MtCO /year of engineered removals by 
2
2030, in line with CCC85 and National Infrastructure Commission assessments.86
•  Deliver £100 million innovation funding for Direct Air Carbon Capture and Storage 
(DACCS) and other GGRs.
•  Develop markets and incentives for investment in greenhouse gas removal 
methods, by consulting on our preferred business models to incentivise early 
investment in GGRs, in 2022.
•  Working in partnership with the devolved administrations, we will aim to launch a call 
for evidence in the coming months exploring the role of the UK ETS as a potential 
long-term market for GGRs, as part of our upcoming consultation on the UK ETS.
•  Explore options for regulatory oversight to provide robust monitoring, reporting and 
verification (MRV) of GGRs, following the recommendations of the BEIS-led MRV 
Task & Finish Group involving experts from industry and academia.
•  Seek an amendment to the Climate Change Act to enable engineered removals to 
contribute to UK carbon budgets.
Progress to date
1. The primary method of achieving net zero  from the most difficult activities to reduce or 
is to take ambitious decarbonisation measures  eliminate from within polluting sectors. This 
across society. However, we must also  approach is supported by the Climate Change 
acknowledge that sectors such as industry,  Committee,87 the Energy Systems Catapult,88 
agriculture and aviation will be difficult to  the National Infrastructure Commission and 
decarbonise completely by 2050. Greenhouse  the National Grid ESO (the GB electricity 
gas removals (GGR) are therefore essential to  system operator).89 
compensate for the residual emissions arising 
184Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
2. GGR is the name given to a group of  3. Following the sector classification 
methods that actively remove greenhouse  adopted by the CCC and in this Strategy, this 
gases, predominantly CO , from the  chapter focuses on engineered removals. 
2
atmosphere, also commonly referred to as  Nature-based solutions, such as afforestation, 
Carbon Dioxide Removal (CDR) methods and  are discussed in the Natural Resources, Waste 
Negative Emission Technologies (NETs). The  and F-gases chapter. 
range of GGR approaches fall broadly into two 
4. The 2017 Clean Growth Strategy was 
categories:
the first time the UK government formally 
•  Nature-based approaches: such  addressed the need to deploy GGR methods. 
as afforestation, and soil carbon  Since then, we have: 
sequestration.
•  Committed up to £100 million funding to 
•  Engineering-based approaches: such as 
research and develop nascent GGR; 
Direct Air Carbon Capture and Storage 
•  Published a call for evidence on GGR in 
(DACCS), Bioenergy with Carbon 
December 2020; and 
Capture and Storage (BECCS), wood 
in construction, biochar, and enhanced  •  Commissioned 4 studies to further our 
weathering (EW). evidence base on the potential for GGR 
deployment in the UK and understanding 
of possible policy incentives. 
185Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Figure 25: Non-exhaustive illustration of the current portfolio of GGRs.90 
Photosynthesis Chemistry
y 
gy
noloegor Tree planting seSqouile csatrrbatoionn   Biochar cBariobeonne cragpy twurieth &   Dciarepctut raeir  Enhanc&e Od cweeaanthering 
echcat (SCS) (BC) storage (BECCS) (DACCS) alkalinisation (EW)
T
Suspended  Silicate  Agricultural 
Agro-forestry Crop and forest residues
amines rocks land
n 
mentatioptions AffWoroeosdtalatinodn &  Apgrraiccutilctuersal  Dedicated crops Hydroxides
eo
pl
m Livestock practices Dedicated crops (marginal)
I
ATMOSPHERE
m
e
st
sy LAND SEA
h 
art
E
BECCS and DACCS
m Abobvioem garossund  Soil Minerals Macrainlcei fsieerd aimndent,
u
di bicarbonate ions
e
m
e 
g
a
or
St
100s of meters 
below the surface
Geological
Reservoirs
186Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
5. In December 2020, BEIS and HM Treasury  which government could consider to enable 
jointly launched a Call for Evidence on GGRs,  their deployment. A Summary of Responses 
which invited views on the role of GGRs in  to the Call for Evidence has been published 
reaching net zero and potential mechanisms  alongside this Strategy.
Net zero transition and opportunities for the sector
Our 2050 vision and how  robust approach to the Monitoring, Reporting 
and Verification (MRV) of negative emissions is 
we get there
essential to the deployment of GGRs at scale. 
6. We are clear that the purpose of  Future markets in which negative emissions 
greenhouse gas removals is to balance the  are traded, whether voluntary or otherwise, will 
residual emissions from sectors that are  require careful regulation to ensure that capital 
unlikely to achieve full decarbonisation by  is being invested into permanent, verifiable 
2050, whilst not substituting for ambitious  carbon removal.
mitigation to achieve net zero. GGRs must not 
8. Evidence around scale-up potential of 
be pursued as a substitute for decisive action 
engineered removal solutions in the UK is 
across the economy to reduce emissions, 
rapidly evolving, alongside innovation in the 
often referred to as mitigation deterrence.91
sector. This evidence92,93 suggests that the 
7. There is also a need to ensure that  next decade will be critical and several GGR 
GGRs result in a permanent net reduction in  solutions, such as Direct Air Capture, will have 
atmospheric carbon. This is a complex task  to be developed or scaled-up significantly 
which, at least in the near-term, may require  during the late 2020s and early 2030s to 
case-by-case scrutiny of the carbon intensity  contribute effectively to later carbon budgets 
of GGR supply chains and long-term indirect  and our net zero target, as well as to build our 
emissions of GGR projects. Developing a  evidence and experience in the sector.
187Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Figure 28: Indicative greenhouse gas removal (negative) emissions 
pathway to 2037
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050
0
Pre-NZS policies
-20
NZS delivery
pathway
)
e
2
O
-40
C
t
M
(
 
s
n
o
si -60
s
mi
E
-80
2050
Range
-100
Source: BEIS analysis 
9. Both nature-based and engineered  10. Based on the current evidence base and 
removal methods will be necessary. For  projects in the pipeline, our analysis indicates 
engineered removals, a portfolio approach,  that engineered removals would be expected 
supporting innovation, demonstration,  to deploy from 0 MtCO  today to at least 
2
and commercialisation of a wide range of  5 MtCO  by 2030 and to around 23 MtCO  
2 2
removal solutions in the 2020s, is needed  by 2035, with higher and lower deployment 
to ensure GGRs can contribute effectively  possible depending on sector-specific and 
to meet our NDC and CB6 targets. The  wider economy developments.
government’s current suite of innovation 
programmes for DACCS and other GGRs will 
help ensure we continually target efficiency 
improvements, cost reductions and novel 
GGR technologies to inform our approach 
over the coming decades. 
188Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
11. By 2030 we envisage significant  Industry may also benefit from BECCS 
deployment of mature BECCS technologies  applications in sectors such as cement. 
and commercial scale deployment of DACCS.  When applicable in these areas, BECCS 
BECCS technologies will include retrofit  can represent a cleaner form of energy 
applications in the power and industry sectors.  production than fossil fuel counterparts, 
BECCS applications in the power sector could  whilst also bringing the additional benefit 
be deployed by the late 2020s, and potentially  of negative emissions. The early 2030s 
achieve ambitious contributions to our NDC  could also see progress in deployment of 
target by 2030. Engineered removals are likely  DACCS technologies, thanks to efforts in 
to be located within or near industrial clusters,  demonstration and piloting during the 2020s 
benefitting from access to CO  transport and  through the support of our Direct Air Capture 
2
storage infrastructure, essential to support  and other GGRs innovation competition. 
delivery of net-negative emissions.
13. By 2050, deployment of engineered 
12. By the early 2030s the portfolio of GGRs  removals at large scale, between 75 and 
deployed at scale will expand as technologies  81 MtCO  per year, will be needed to help 
2
mature and demand from end-use sectors  compensate residual emissions. This is 
increases. Beyond the contribution of  expected to be equivalent to around 45-80% 
power BECCS to the electricity grid,  of total emissions captured across the UK 
production of hydrogen, biogas/biomethane  economy and will see predominantly the scale 
fuels with BECCS could also support the  up of DACCS and BECCS with gasification 
decarbonisation of transport, industry and  technologies.  
potentially power and heat in buildings. 
189Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Greenhouse gas removals in the context  
of the wider net zero system
There will be several complex interdependencies between GGR methods and the wider 
net zero system. Progress towards decarbonisation in other sectors will affect the extent 
to which GGR deployment will be required to hit our emissions targets. Conversely, GGRs 
have resource requirements that will impact other sectors. For example, deployment of 
engineered GGRs in the early years will likely be constrained by the availability of CO  
2
transport and storage  injection capacity and any development of GGR business models 
will need to consider interactions with Industrial Carbon Capture and hydrogen business 
models, along with wider carbon pricing policy. We have committed to consider how the 
UK Emissions Trading Scheme could be expanded in future to provide a long-term support 
mechanism for GGRs.
Biomass availability and supply
Biomass policy is highly interdependent with GGR deployment. Sustainable biomass is 
a unique renewable organic material, and the future availability of sustainable biomass 
directly influences the scale GGRs such as BECCS and biochar can deploy to. Constraints 
on demand for perennial energy crops and solid recovered fuels, related mostly to 
technological and financial challenges, will need to be overcome via research and 
innovation to see significant increase in the take up of these biomass feedstocks. The 
upcoming Biomass Strategy (due to publish in 2022) will review the amount of sustainable 
biomass available to the UK and set out a framework for how this resource can be best 
utilised across the economy to help achieve our net zero target. The upcoming biomass 
policy statement gives an early indication of this framework, setting out the principles and 
policy aims for biomass up to 2050.
The Strategy will also assess the UK’s current sustainability standards, to see where and 
how we can improve them even further. Any future BECCS project would be required to 
meet stringent sustainability requirements for the production and use of biomass, as will be 
set out in the Biomass Strategy.
190Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Using our land effectively
Land use change will be required to accommodate GGRs, either directly through nature 
based GGRs such as afforestation or indirectly from increased production of woody 
biomass, such as perennial energy crops or short rotation forestry, to use for BECCS or 
other opportunities in the wider bioeconomy.
What is best grown, where, in what quantity, and for what purpose, determines the 
feasibility of a GGR through land-use change. Feasibility therefore must consider, amongst 
others: alternative land use, feasible technological options for production, the net impact on 
GHG emissions, interactions with competing land demands for other strategic government 
objectives such as food security, nature conservation and housing, as well as social 
implications such as integration of GGRs into existing farm practice and environmental 
co-benefits/risks.
Further research is required into best practice for establishing GGRs in a productive and 
biodiverse landscape, and what levers may be required to establish such measures on 
land that is largely privately owned. Research projects through the UKRI SPF on GGRs 
and NERC GGR Research Programme will start to address these evidence gaps. GGR 
deployment will require alignment with HMGs schemes to reward environmental land 
management for example: Sustainable Farming Incentive (SFI), Local Nature Recovery 
(LNR) and Landscape Recovery Schemes. We will also need to consider interactions with 
private sector demands, such as through the domestic voluntary carbon market. 
Uncertain impacts from climate change such as impacts to national stocks of high-grade 
farmland also demands consideration of what is both feasible now and on the way to 2050. 
Differences in spatial and temporal scales between removal technologies, such longer pay-
back times for afforestation as opposed to short rotation forestry, create opportunities to 
maximise carbon removals to 2050 through a mix of land based GGRs.
Managing environmental risks and benefits
There are significant opportunities for maximising environmental co-benefits through nature 
based GGRs. For example, integrating perennial energy crops (e.g., short rotation coppice 
(SRC)) into existing farm systems can increase the abundance and diversity of flora and 
fauna at a field scale, though these benefits depend on factors such as historic cropping 
patterns and spatial distribution. At a landscape scale, afforestation can deliver co-benefits 
through natural flood management and urban cooling. However, benefits depend on 
sustainable forest management and choosing the right location and species of tree in 
the ecosystem.
191Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
We must ensure that GGR technologies do not create new environmental risks. For 
instance, feedstock production for BECCS, biochar and wood in construction have 
potentially significant land requirements which if mismanaged could pose risks to 
biodiversity. The deployment of BECCS could also potentially impact local air quality and 
we must ensure that regulation and abatement on emissions other than CO  develop to 
2
reflect this. It is also necessary to ensure resilience to the impact future climate change 
might have on the feasibility to deliver GGRs and wider environment objectives.
CO  Transport and Storage networks 
2
By the early 2030s, CO  transport and storage infrastructure availability could potentially 
2
constrain GGR deployment, as the significant overall expansion of CCUS projects creates 
competition for access to the network.
Seizing new opportunities 16. It will be crucial to ensure that future GGR 
policy maximises the economic and regional 
14. The UK is well placed to take a leading 
development opportunities of developing 
role in GGR policy development and 
the low carbon economy in our industrial 
deployment. We have world-leading academic 
heartlands. Economic benefits include creating 
and industry expertise in relevant sectors, as 
new, highly skilled jobs in our industrial 
well as a rapidly developing carbon capture 
heartlands and safeguarding those existing 
usage and storage (CCUS) sector and access 
in adjacent sectors with the potential to be 
to large volumes of quality geological CO  
adversely affected by the transition to net zero, 
2
storage. Enabling GGR deployment will not 
as well as supply chains.
only help us hit net zero but can support the 
UK’s ability to export skills and expertise to 
other nations with comparable ambitions for 
the sector.
15. To achieve the level of negative emissions 
indicated by our central delivery pathway to 
2037 and keep us on track to deliver net zero, 
we will need additional public and private 
investment of around £20 billion. Scaling 
up the GGR sector will also regenerate 
communities and open up new employment 
opportunities right around the UK. 
192Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Policies & proposals
17. Government has a clear role to play  20. GGR credits could function within an ETS 
in responsibly deploying GGRs, and is  market through, for instance, allowing polluting 
committing to an ambition of deploying at  sectors to meet their obligations through the 
least 5 MtCO /year of engineered removals by  procurement of negative emissions alongside 
2
2030. To achieve this, we are taking ambitious  conventional abatement options. In the Energy 
steps to enable commercial demonstration  White Paper, the government committed to 
and deployment of engineered GGRs such  exploring how the UK ETS could incentivise 
as Direct Air Capture. We are addressing  the deployment of GGR technologies. We 
their financial and regulatory barriers, whilst  aim to work with our Devolved Administration 
also working to build the evidence base and  colleagues to launch a call for evidence in 
address continued uncertainty around how  the coming months on the role the UK ETS 
GGRs can most effectively and sustainably  could have as a potential long-term market 
be deployed and verified. Our role will  for engineered or nature-based GGRs. This 
change over time, as GGRs become more  may explore possible eligibility criteria for 
established, and the sector matures.  participation in the UK ETS, different types 
of GGR market design, and timings for when 
Addressing financial barriers and 
GGRs could be added to the market. 
attracting investment
21. We recognise that a market for GGRs will 
18. One of the fundamental barriers to GGR  take time to establish and a phased approach 
deployment is the lack of an established  is likely to be necessary. In the short-term, 
market or customer demand for engineered  there may be a role for government in 
removals. GGR technologies are associated  providing bespoke support for initial projects 
with high capital and operational costs,  to de-risk investment decisions and provide 
making private investment unattractive in the  revenue certainty for technology developers. 
absence of a stable revenue stream for the  Yet we also recognise the potential for early 
provision of negative emissions.  support instruments to integrate with market-
based approaches, such as combining 
19. The government’s vision is to establish 
contract mechanisms with inclusion of GGRs 
a liquid market for carbon removals, in 
in the UK ETS.
which polluters have a strong policy or 
financial incentive to invest in GGRs to 
compensate for their remaining emissions. 
The UK Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) 
is a possible market-based solution for 
stimulating investment by GGRs – moving 
us towards a single, integrated compliance 
market for carbon, with negative emissions 
supporting liquidity as the ETS allowance cap 
falls over time.
193Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
22. To advance our ambition to stimulate  Innovation
the GGRs sector, we will consult on business 
25. The majority of GGR techniques are at a 
models for engineered GGRs in Spring 
pre-commercial stage and require innovation 
2022. This will set out details of our preferred 
and demonstration support to be ready for 
mechanisms to incentivise early investment 
commercial deployment. To address this GGR 
and enable commercial demonstration of a 
technologies were included as one of ten 
range of GGR technologies from the mid-
innovation priority areas announced in the Ten 
to-late 2020s. The consultation will consider 
Point Plan for a green industrial revolution.94 
how GGR incentives interact with policies and 
Together with UKRI, we are investing £100 
business models currently under development 
million in the research, development, and 
for CCUS, hydrogen production, sustainable 
demonstration of greenhouse gas removals 
aviation fuels and other relevant sectors, along 
across multiple programmes. This includes the 
with wider carbon pricing policy. It will also 
DAC and other GGR innovation competition 
consider how near-term policy incentives can 
which will support the construction of pilot 
most effectively leverage private investment 
plants for a range of promising technologies 
and enable a transition towards a market-led 
to help them achieve commercial realisation.95 
framework as the sector matures.
The programme’s pilot projects could remove 
23. Our proposals will be informed by a  between 100 and 1,000 tonnes of CO e per 
2
study currently being conducted for BEIS by  year in 2025 and have the potential to scale 
Element Energy, as well as a recent study  up to millions of tonnes by the 2030s.
on commercial frameworks for first-of-a-kind 
26. Through the government’s Strategic 
Power BECCS projects which is published 
Priorities Fund, UK Research and Innovation 
alongside this document.
(UKRI) will invest £31.5 million in five land 
24. Whilst seeking to capitalise on the  based GGR demonstrator projects and a 
economic benefits of GGR development  central hub. The hub will lead on coordination 
in the UK, we are also mindful of potential  across the programme, as well as conducting 
disruption to existing markets and the effects  cross-cutting research on the environmental, 
on consumers and businesses. The cost  economic, social, ethical and governance 
of support for GGRs is likely to be shared  implications of GGR approaches.
between the public and private sector. We will 
27. The Biomass Feedstocks Innovation 
seek to develop an appropriate balance of risk 
Programme aims to increase the production 
allocation over the short, medium, and long 
of sustainable domestic biomass by funding 
term. Potential policy frameworks to enable 
innovative ideas that barriers production. The 
developing GGR solutions will require careful 
sustainable, increased supply of biomass for 
consideration to guard against unintended 
bioenergy conversion is a critical factor for the 
effects. We will ensure that support for 
success of BECCS. 
GGRs does not distort the development 
and commercialisation of decarbonisation 
technologies in other sectors.
194Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
28. We are also publishing the outputs of  31. Alongside this document we have 
two BEIS commissioned research projects  published a report summarising the work of 
designed to further our understanding and  the group, including proposed principles to 
evidence base on GGR methods and their  guide our MRV approach, initial suggestions 
deployment. An updated assessment of  for how MRV protocols could operate, and 
greenhouse gas removal methods and their  the future work required to advance the 
potential deployment in the UK provides a  development of an MRV policy for negative 
comprehensive and up-to-date assessment  emissions. The government will carefully 
of lifecycle costs, TRL and deployment  consider the Group’s advice as we take 
potential to 2050.  forward future work in this area.
Monitoring, reporting and  32. Accounting for emissions associated 
with international supply chains presents a 
verification of GGRs
challenge for GGR carbon accounting, and we 
29. Once atmospheric carbon has been  will engage with our international counterparts 
captured, the length of time it remains  to ensure best practice is achieved. 
captured becomes crucial in verifying the  Accounting for possible re-emissions, e.g., 
effectiveness of a GGR process. This applies  of CO  captured internationally but stored 
2
to both nature based and engineered solutions  in the UK may be a particular challenge. We 
and is often referred to as the ‘permanence’  commit to collaborating with international 
or ‘durability’ of GGRs. Establishing robust  partners to ensure alignment on any future 
Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV)  MRV framework.
protocols is highly complex, particularly for 
Legal and regulatory 
some nature-based solutions.
30. In 2021, we established a GGR MRV  33. Currently the Climate Change Act 2008 
Task and Finish Group, comprised of experts  only recognises removals from Land Use, 
across government, industry, academia, and  Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) 
regulatory services. The role of the group  as counting towards our carbon budgets, a 
was to provide advice and guidance on the  definition which does not allow engineered 
development of a MRV policy approach for  removals and some nature-based solutions 
GGRs. A recommendation made by the group  to contribute. We propose to bring forward 
is the need for an independent audit function  legislative amendments to address this.
to be responsible for a monitoring, reporting 
34. An MRV regime will be required to ensure 
and verification regime. This would ensure that 
that the amount and permanence of removals 
the amount and permanence of removals are 
are quantified, robustly and transparently, with 
quantified, robustly and transparently, which 
tolerable uncertainty. We will explore options 
will be essential to developing and supporting 
for establishing a regulatory function to provide 
a market for GGRs. 
this oversight, taking into consideration the 
advice of the MRV Task and Finish Group. 
195Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Working together across the UK 
Example of policy action by Scottish Government 
UK Government is working across all  The Scottish Government’s Climate Change 
levels of government and with Devolved  Plan committed to a detailed feasibility study 
Administrations to ensure consistent  of opportunities for developing negative 
action on Greenhouse Gas Removals, and  emission technologies (NETs) in Scotland. This 
across the UK. will identify specific sites and applications of 
NETs, including developing work to support 
Scotland 
policy on Direct Air Capture and its role in 
our future energy system. The launch of a 
Storegga and Carbon Engineering have 
£180 million Emerging Energy Technologies 
announced a partnership to develop 
Fund to support Hydrogen, CCS, and NETs 
commercial Direct Air Capture (DAC) projects 
projects has also been announced.
in the UK, potentially contributing to the 
removal of millions of tonnes of CO  each 
2
year. One location being considered for 
their first proposed plant will sequester up 
to 1 mtpa, connected via pipeline to the 
Acorn Carbon Capture and Storage project 
at St Fergus. The proposed DAC facility 
would deliver permanent CO  removal by 
2
capturing CO  from the air then safely and 
2
permanently storing it deep below the seabed 
in an offshore geological storage site. The 
offshore Acorn CO  storage site is aiming to 
2
be operational by the mid-2020s and the first 
DAC project could be operational within two 
years of the store opening.
196Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
Endnotes
1  BEIS analysis (2021), ‘Final UK greenhouse gas emission national statistics: 1990 to 2019’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-
statistics-1990-to-2019
2  ‘Final UK greenhouse gas emission national statistics: 1990 to 2019’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-to-2019
3  BEIS (2021) ‘Early phase out of unabated coal generation in Great Britain’ - https://www.gov.
uk/government/consultations/early-phase-out-of-unabated-coal-generation-in-great-britain
4  BEIS (2020), ‘Energy White Paper: Powering our Net Zero Future’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/energy-white-paper-powering-our-net-zero-future
5  BEIS analysis based on 2019 data from BEIS (2021), ‘Digest of UK Energy Statistics’,  
https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/digest-of-uk-energy-statistics-dukes#2021
6  BEIS (2021) ‘Decarbonisation readiness: call for evidence on the expansion of the 2009 
Carbon Capture Readiness requirements’, https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/
decarbonisation-readiness-call-for-evidence-on-the-expansion-of-the-2009-carbon-capture-
readiness-requirements
7  CCC (2021) ‘Independent Assessment of UK Climate Risk June 2021’ – https://www.theccc.
org.uk/publication/independent-assessment-of-uk-climate-risk/
8  National Grid ESO (2020), ‘Annex 2 Final Cost-benefit Analysis Report from Phase 1 outputs 
of National Grid ESO’s Offshore Coordination Project’, https://www.nationalgrideso.com/
document/182936/download
9  BEIS (2021), ‘Smart Systems and Flexibility Plan 2021: Appendix I – Electricity system 
flexibility modelling’ https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/1003787/smart-systems-appendix-i-electricity-system-flexibility-
modelling.pdf
10  BEIS (2021), ‘Smart metering statistics, quarterly update June 2021’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/collections/smart-meters-statistics
11  BEIS (2021) ‘Proposals for a Future System Operator role’ – https://www.gov.uk/government/
consultations/proposals-for-a-future-system-operator-role
12  BEIS (2021) ‘Energy code reform: governance framework’ – https://www.gov.uk/government/
consultations/energy-code-reform-governance-framework
13  BEIS (2021) ‘Capacity Market 2021: call for evidence on early action to align with net zero’ 
– https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/capacity-market-2021-call-for-evidence-on-
early-action-to-align-with-net-zero
14  BEIS (2021) ‘Energy retail market strategy for the 2020s’ – https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/energy-retail-market-strategy-for-the-2020s
197Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
15  BEIS analysis based on 2019 data from BEIS (2021), ‘Digest of UK Energy Statistics’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/collections/digest-of-uk-energy-statistics-dukes#2021
16  BEIS (2021) ‘Longer Duration Energy Storage Demonstration (LODES) competition’ - https://
www.gov.uk/government/collections/longer-duration-energy-storage-demonstration-lodes-
competition
17  Marginal emissions sources that fall outside these categories, but are accounted for in the 
sector’s emissions, include methane leakage from closed coal mines, nuclear fuel production 
and collieries.
18  For further detail on the current role of hydrogen, see chapter 1 of Analytical Annex to UK 
Hydrogen Strategy. BEIS (2021), ‘Hydrogen analytical annex’, https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1011499/Hydrogen_
Analytical_Annex.pdf
19  DfT (2020), ‘Renewable Fuel Statistics 2019 Final Report’, https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/932933/renewable-fuel-
statistics-2019-final-report.pdf
20  These hydrogen production capacity ranges capture uncertainty in hydrogen demand 
across all sectors that use hydrogen. BEIS (2021), ‘UK Hydrogen Strategy’, BEIS (2021), 
‘Hydrogen analytical annex’, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1011499/Hydrogen_Analytical_Annex.pdf; BEIS (2021), 
‘Hydrogen analytical annex’, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1011499/Hydrogen_Analytical_Annex.pdf.
21  Assuming plants operate at 95% load factor. In practice, plants may run at lower load factors, 
requiring even higher hydrogen production capacity to be installed. These are estimates of 
production capacity for two illustrative delivery pathways where demand is within the range 
presented in the Hydrogen Strategy, and only capture uncertainty around hydrogen demand for 
heat.
22  BEIS analysis on capital investment required to deliver production capacity.
23  BEIS analysis based on the Energy Innovation Needs Assessment (EINA) methodology with 
updated domestic and global scenarios; figures consider the direct jobs linked to hydrogen 
production, stationary CHP fuel cells and domestic distribution only. Vivid Economics (2019), 
‘Hydrogen and fuel cells (EINA sub-theme)’, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/845658/energy-innovation-needs-
assessment-hydrogen-fuel-cells.pdf
24  BEIS (2021), ‘Low Carbon Hydrogen Supply 2 Competition’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/low-carbon-hydrogen-supply-2-competition
25  BEIS (2021), ‘Open Consultation: Design of a business model for low carbon hydrogen’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/design-of-a-business-model-for-low-carbon-
hydrogen
26  BEIS (2021), ‘Open Consultation: Design of a business model for low carbon hydrogen’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/designing-the-net-zero-hydrogen-fund 
198Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
27  BEIS (2021), ‘Open Consultation: Designing a UK low carbon hydrogen standard’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/consultations/designing-a-uk-low-carbon-hydrogen-standard
28  Welsh Government, Decarbonisation of Homes in Wales Advisory Group, https://gov.wales/
decarbonisation-homes-wales-advisory-group
29  ONS (2021), ‘Annual Business Survey’, https://www.ons.gov.uk/
businessindustryandtrade/business/businessservices/datasets/
uknonfinancialbusinesseconomyannualbusinesssurveysectionsas
30  ONS , ‘Gross Domestic Product (GDP), https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/
grossdomesticproductgdp
31  ONS (2021), ‘Annual Business Survey’, https://www.ons.gov.uk/
businessindustryandtrade/business/businessservices/datasets/
uknonfinancialbusinesseconomyannualbusinesssurveysectionsas
32  UK in a Changing Europe (2020), ‘Manufacturing and Brexit’, https://ukandeu.ac.uk/research-
papers/manufacturing-and-brexit/
33  The definition of manufacturing and refining used above is similar but not identical to the 
definition of industry used here, this is due to a different taxonomy being used (SIC codes and 
IPCC codes respectively).
34  BEIS (2021), ‘Final UK greenhouse gas emission national statistics: 1990 to 2019’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-
1990-to-2019 Industry sector emissions include emissions from industrial processes, 
manufacturing, and production, including fuel combustion and product uses in industrial 
buildings, as well as emissions from refineries and construction machinery. This definition of 
industry is broader than the definition used in the Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy and the 
Hydrogen Strategy, which excluded the non-road mobile machinery and construction sectors.
35  Government analysis suggests up to 5,000 CCUS jobs could be supported in 2025 across 
industry, power, and transport and storage network.
36  BEIS (2019), ‘Energy Innovation Needs Assessment’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/energy-innovation-needs-assessments
37  National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory (2021), ‘Greenhouse Gas emissions reports’, 
https://naei.beis.gov.uk/reports/reports?section_id=3
38  Employment figures sourced from ONS (2018), ‘Industry (2, 3 and 5 – digit SIC) – 
Business Register and Employment Survey (BRES): Table 2’, https://www.ons.gov.uk/
employmentandlabourmarket/peopleinwork/employmentandemployeetypes/datasets/
industry235digitsicbusinessregisterandemploymentsurveybrestable2 Indirect jobs 
estimates based on ONS (2019), ‘Type I UK employment multipliers and effects, reference 
year 2015’, https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/nationalaccounts/supplyandusetables/
adhocs/009746typeiukemploymentmultipliersandeffectsreferenceyear2015
39  National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory (2021), ‘Greenhouse Gas emissions reports’, 
https://naei.beis.gov.uk/reports/reports?section_id=3
199Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
40  BEIS analysis (2021), ‘Net Zero Industry Pathway (N-ZIP) model’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/
wp-content/uploads/2020/12/N-ZIP-Model.xlsb
41  The figures were derived by the CCC based on research from 2018 (Scott, et al., 2018). 
This research acknowledges that there are a range of possible scenarios that differ greatly in 
resource efficiency savings. The CCC’s balanced pathway assume savings consistent with the 
high scenario. Empirical evidence on the likelihood of these scenarios is limited. The balanced 
pathway also includes estimated savings from industrial buildings, which are covered in the 
Heat & Buildings chapter.
42  CCC (2020), ‘Sixth Carbon Budget’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/sixth-carbon-
budget/
43  Defined by the IDS as sites outside a 25km radius from the 6 main industrial clusters 
(Grangemouth, Teesside, Humberside, Merseyside, South Wales and Southampton)
44  National Atmospheric Emissions Inventory, ‘Emissions from NAEI large point sources’, https://
naei.beis.gov.uk/data/map-large-source
45  Locations outside of the 6 main clusters where co-location of industrial units could yield 
integrated solutions
46  ONS (2020), ‘Households projections for England’, Table 401, https://www.ons.gov.uk/
peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationprojections/datasets/
householdprojectionsforengland ; BEIS (2020) ‘Non-domestic National Energy Efficiency Data-
Framework’ based on 2018 data, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/non-domestic-
national-energy-efficiency-data-framework-nd-need-2020 
47  Buildings Research Establishment (2020), ‘The Housing Stock of the United Kingdom’, https://
files.bregroup.com/bretrust/The-Housing-Stock-of-the-United-Kingdom_Report_BRE-Trust.pdf
48  This figure includes only emissions from direct energy use in buildings. Including  emissions 
from producing the energy used, the figure is 26%. BEIS Analysis, BEIS (2021), ‘Final UK 
greenhouse gas emissions national statistics: 1990 to 2019’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-to-2019; ONS (2021), 
‘Energy Consumption in the UK’, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/energy-
consumption-in-the-uk-2020. This figure includes not only emissions from direct energy use in 
buildings but also emissions from producing the energy used.
49  Building Services Research and Information Association (BSRIA) (2020), Domestic boilers 
market analysis – United Kingdom, 2020, https://www.bsria.com/uk/ 
50  These figures are on an indirect basis, i.e. include emissions from producing the energy used. 
On a direct basis, the equivalent figures are 99% and 17%. BEIS Analysis, BEIS (2021), 
‘Final UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics: 1990 to 2019’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-to-2019;  
ONS (2021), ‘Energy Consumption in the UK’, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/
energy-consumption-in-the-uk-2020. 
51  ONS (2020), ‘Households projections for England’, https://www.ons.gov.uk/
peoplepopulationandcommunity/populationandmigration/populationprojections/datasets/
householdprojectionsforengland, Table 401
200Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
52  MHCLG (2020), ‘English Housing Survey 2019 to 2020’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/english-housing-survey-2019-to-2020-headline-report, Annex table 2.2.
53  BEIS (2020), ‘Energy Consumption in the UK 2020’, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/
energy-consumption-in-the-uk-2020
54  MHCLG (2020), ‘English Housing Survey 2019 to 2020’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/english-housing-survey-2019-to-2020-headline-report, Annex table 2.8
55  MHCLG (2020), ‘English Housing Survey 2019 to 2020’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/english-housing-survey-2019-to-2020-headline-report
56  MHCLG (2020), ‘English Housing Survey 2019 to 2020’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/english-housing-survey-2019-to-2020-headline-report, Annex table 2.8
57  ‘Fabric first’ means installing measures that upgrade the building fabric (e.g. walls/lofts) before 
making changes to the heating system.
58  BEIS (2020), ‘Non-domestic National Energy Efficiency Data-Framework’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/statistics/non-domestic-national-energy-efficiency-data-framework-nd-need-2020
59  BEIS analysis, this figure excludes industrial buildings. BEIS (2020), ‘Final UK greenhouse gas 
emissions national statistics: 1990 to 2018’, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-
greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-to-2018, Table 19
60  BEIS (2016), ‘Building Energy Efficiency Survey‘, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
building-energy-efficiency-survey-bees 
61  BEIS (2020), ‘Final 2018 UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics: 1990 to 2018’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-
statistics-1990-to-2018 
62  BEIS analysis based on the Energy Innovation Needs Assessment (Vivid Economics, 2019)
63  IEEG (2020) ‘Rebuilding for resilience - energy efficiency’s offer for a net zero compatible 
stimulus and recovery’, https://www.theeeig.co.uk/news/starstarnew-reportstarstar-rebuilding-
for-resilience-energy-efficiency-s-offer-for-a-net-zero-compatible-stimulus-and-recovery/. 
Derived from Jan Rosenow and others (2018). Assumes EPC band C by 2030 with cost 
savings at 2020 prices.
64  BEIS (2021), ‘Sustainable warmth: protecting vulnerable households in England’, https://www.
gov.uk/government/publications/sustainable-warmth-protecting-vulnerable-households-in-
england
65  Curl and Kearns (2017) ‘Housing improvements, fuel payment difficulties and mental health in 
deprived communities’, International Journal of Housing Policy, https://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/full/10.1080/14616718.2016.1248526.
66  University of Cambridge (2017), ‘Do House Prices and Rents in the Private Rented Sector 
Reflect Energy Efficiency Levels’ https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/910853/beis-cambridge-house-price-report.pdf
201Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
67  No or low-regrets’ means actions that are cost-effective now and will continue to prove 
beneficial in future. For example, installing energy efficiency measures reduce consumer bills 
now, while making buildings warmer and comfier, but have the added benefit of making future 
installations of low carbon heating more cost effective.
68  BEIS (2021), ‘Opportunity areas for district heating networks in the UK: Second National 
Comprehensive Assessment’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/opportunity-areas-
for-district-heating-networks-in-the-uk-second-national-comprehensive-assessment
69  CITB (2021), ‘Building Skills for Net Zero’ https://www.citb.co.uk/media/kkpkwc42/building_
skills_net_zero_full_report.pdf
70  Decarbonisation of Homes in Wales Advisory Group, Welsh Government, https://gov.wales/
decarbonisation-homes-wales-advisory-group
71  International aviation and shipping emissions are not included in domestic transport as they are 
reported separately.
72  International Aviation and Shipping emissions are not included in the UK’s 68% NDC target and 
are included in carbon budgets from CB6.
73  Welsh Government (2021), ‘Electric vehicle charging strategy for Wales’, https://gov.wales/
electric-vehicle-charging-strategy-wales
74  BEIS analysis of 1990-2019 UK GHG emissions statistics. BEIS (2021), ‘Final UK greenhouse 
gas emissions national statistics 1990 to 2019’, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/
final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-to-2019.
75  Defra (2020), ‘Agricultural Transition Plan 2021 to 2024’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/agricultural-transition-plan-2021-to-2024
76  BEIS (2021), ‘Final UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics 1990 to 2019’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-
1990-to-2019
77  Defra (2018), ‘Resources and waster strategy for England’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-to-2019 
78  BEIS (2021), ‘Final UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-to-2019
79  Defra (2017), ‘UK ratifies new agreement to tackle global warming’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/news/uk-ratifies-new-agreement-to-tackle-global-warming
80  The Ozone-Depleting Substances and Fluorinated Greenhouse Gases (Amendment 
etc.) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019. Available at: https://www.legislation.gov.uk/
ukdsi/2019/9780111177136.
81  Defra (2018), ’25 Year Environment Plan’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/25-
year-environment-plan 
202Chapter 3 – Reducing Emissions across the Economy
82  Defra (2021), ‘Environmental land management schemes: payment principles’, https://www.
gov.uk/government/publications/environmental-land-management-schemes-payment-
principles/environmental-land-management-schemes-payment-principles https://www.gov.
uk/government/publications/environmental-land-management-schemes-payment-principles/
environmental-land-management-schemes-payment-principles#:~:text=We%20will%20
set%20payment%20rates,a%20wide%20range%20of%20activities.
83  Defra (2021), ‘Sustainable Farming Incentive: Defra’s plans for piloting and launching the 
scheme’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/sustainable-farming-incentive-scheme-
pilot-launch-overview/sustainable-farming-incentive-defras-plans-for-piloting-and-launching-
the-scheme
84  Cynfoeth Naturiol Cymru Natural Resources Wales (2020), ‘National Peatland Action 
Programme, 2020-2025’, https://cdn.cyfoethnaturiol.cymru/media/692545/national-peatlands-
action-programme.pdf
85  CCC (2021), ‘2021 Progress Report to Parliament’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/
uploads/2021/06/Progress-in-reducing-emissions-2021-Report-to-Parliament.pdf
86  National Infrastructure Commission (2021), ‘Engineered greenhouse gas removals’, https://nic.
org.uk/app/uploads/NIC-July-2021-Engineered-Greenhouse-Gas-Removals-UPDATED.pdf
87  CCC (2020), ‘The Sixth Carbon Budget: Greenhouse gas removals’, https://www.theccc.org.
uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Sector-summary-GHG-removals.pdf
88  Energy Systems Catapult (2020), ‘Innovating to Net Zero: UK Net Zero Report’, https://
es.catapult.org.uk/reports/innovating-to-net-zero/
89  National Grid (2020), ‘Future Energy Scenarios’, https://www.nationalgrideso.com/
document/173821/download
90  Minx et al (2018), ‘Environmental Research Letters’, IPO, Volume 13, Number 6
91  McLaren, D (2020), ‘Quantifying the potential scale of mitigation deterrence from greenhouse 
has removal techniques’, Climatic Change, 162, 2411-2428, https://link.springer.com/
article/10.1007/s10584-020-02732-3
92  CCC (2020), ‘Sixth Carbon Budget’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/sixth-carbon-
budget/
93  BEIS (2021), ‘Greenhouse Gas Removal Methods Technology Assessment Report’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/greenhouse-gas-removal-methods-technology-
assessment-report
94  BEIS (2020), ‘The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/the-ten-point-plan-for-a-green-industrial-revolution
95  BEIS (2021), ‘Projects selected for Phase 1 of the Direct air capture and greenhouse gas 
removal programme’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/direct-air-capture-and-
other-greenhouse-gas-removal-technologies-competition/projects-selected-for-phase-1-of-
the-direct-air-capture-and-greenhouse-gas-removal-programme
203Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Supporting 
the Transition 
across the 
Economy
4
Chapter205Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
4i. Innovation for net zero
Harnessing UK strengths in R&D to reach net zero
Our Key Commitments
•  Increase government investment in R&D to £22 billion; increase total R&D 
investment to 2.4% of GDP by 2027. 
•  Publish the UK’s first Net Zero Research & Innovation Framework to set out 
the key research and innovation challenges for the next 5-10 years; and a future 
update to demonstrate how the government is delivering against these. 
•  Deliver a Government programme of innovation to enable decarbonisation – 
funding of at least £1.5bn during next spending review period expanding a portfolio 
of cross government net zero innovation to fund BEIS-led programmes on power, 
buildings and industry; DfT-led programmes across transport; and DEFRA led 
programmes on natural resources, waste and F-gases, to target priorities aligned 
with the Net Zero Research & Innovation Framework. This spending includes new 
programmes set out in this Strategy such as £60m Heat Pump Ready programme.
•  Take a leadership role in Mission Innovation 2.0, a global initiative working to 
accelerate clean energy innovation.1
206Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
The challenge
1. Innovation is central to our approach  will also support businesses to grow and 
to delivering net zero. It will require a step  solutions to be delivered at scale. Research, 
change in the rate of new technologies and  development, and innovation are needed 
processes being developed and deployed into  to allow government, industry and business 
the market and being adopted by businesses  to make decisions about what new 
and consumers. Continued investment in  technologies and systems are promising. 
cutting-edge research, development, and  To respond, government must enable the 
demonstration, will be integral to achieving  efficient scaling of technologies, systems, 
this transformation and to the UK leading  and business models to pull them through to 
the world in areas of existing and potential  commercialisation for 2050 - and beyond.
competitive advantage. This investment 
Our goal
2. Our goal is for the UK to be a global leader  4. In the Prime Minister’s Ten Point Plan for 
in the technologies, processes, services, and  a Green Industrial Revolution,2 we restated 
business models needed to decarbonise our  our commitment to raise total private and 
economies, protect our environment, and  public R&D investment to 2.4% of GDP by 
adapt to a changing climate. We will support  2027 – enabling the next phase of green 
our world class innovators, entrepreneurs,  innovation to help bring down the cost of the 
and financial institutions to develop and  net zero transition, nurture the development 
deploy the key technologies of the future.  of better products and business models, 
This will need to take place alongside other  and understand consumer choices. We 
cross-cutting policies, regulatory changes,  have started delivering on this with funding 
and commitments. announced for programmes across the 
portfolio including renewables, energy 
3. By supporting innovation, we could unlock 
storage and flexibility, and hydrogen.3 This is 
the potential for 300,000 jobs in exports and 
contributing to levelling up across all regions 
domestic industry through new commercial 
of the UK whilst helping us to achieve our 
opportunities across low carbon sectors. 
net zero target.
207Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
The role of innovation
5. Innovation can significantly reduce costs  7. The Prime Minister’s Ten Point Plan for 
of the technologies, processes, and systems  a Green Industrial Revolution, our Plan for 
needed to reach net zero. This goes beyond  Growth and our new Innovation Strategy 
just developing technologies. It also means  bring together ambitious policies and 
exploring new business models, approaches  significant public investment to achieve net 
to financing, the regulatory environment and  zero, whilst seeking to mobilise substantial 
how consumers respond. Taking a whole  private investment. These commitments will 
systems approach to innovation will be integral  position the UK to take advantage of export 
to maintaining and developing the UK’s  opportunities in global markets presented by 
global leadership in areas where we have, or  these low carbon technologies and services.
can develop, an international comparative 
advantage or unique capability. We must 
harness the UK’s international reputation to 
attract inward investment and anchor existing 
and emerging supply chains in the UK. 
International collaboration will also be critical 
to ensure that clean technologies become 
cheaper and more readily available.
6. Innovation is a process which occurs 
within an ecosystem of interacting actors, 
technologies, and institutions. This requires 
technologies, systems or processes to 
progress through multiple phases of 
development – from basic research, through 
to commercialisation and diffusion. However, 
innovation does not flow neatly in one direction 
from one phase to the next; it is unpredictable 
and serendipitous, involving constant cycles 
of learning, testing, refining, and discovery. At 
each phase of the innovation process there 
are different market failures and barriers, 
requiring distinct interventions. In the early 
stages, there are often minimal incentives 
for private actors to invest in innovation 
and direct funding policies can help ‘push’ 
technologies towards demonstration and 
early commercialisation. In the later stages, 
the importance of attracting private finance 
grows. Market incentive policies support 
the development of markets and leverage 
private finance to ‘pull’ technologies towards 
deployment and diffusion.
208Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Case study: Glass Futures with Encirc pilot project
Through government’s 2016-21 Energy Innovation Programme, BEIS funded 
Encirc (a glass container manufacturer) and Glass Futures (an industry 
research and technology organisation) to lead a trial project based in Derrylin, 
Northern Ireland to help determine the most effective approach to using low 
carbon fuels in manufacturing in the glass sector.
This revolutionary project has proven that new bottles can be made from 
100% recycled glass by using energy only from burning low carbon biofuels. 
It is thought that this world-first initiative will set a global standard and make 
way for an industry-wide reduction in carbon emissions in the glass sector.
When made from waste organic materials, biofuels are a renewable and much 
more sustainable fuel source than those traditionally used by the glass sector 
and can reduce the carbon footprint of each bottle by up to 90%. By using up 
to 100% recycled glass to create new bottles, the trial has further minimised 
the lifetime impact of these new products.
Supporting innovation for net zero
8. Achieving net zero will require profound  this will be research to understand consumer 
changes to the UK economy. It will mean  acceptability and behaviour, and to create 
increasing our low carbon electricity supply,  economic incentives will also be required for 
making the transition to low carbon buildings,  lasting change.
decarbonising transport, building a hydrogen 
10. We’re publishing the Net Zero Research 
economy, decarbonising industry, rolling-out 
& Innovation Framework which sets out the 
carbon capture and storage, transforming 
critical net zero research and innovation 
the way land and marine spaces are used, 
challenges across the UK that require 
improving agricultural management, adopting 
development over the next 5-10 years, and 
better waste management, and deploying 
presents timelines of short, medium, and 
technologies to remove greenhouse gases 
longer-term priorities. The framework will help 
from the atmosphere. This should include 
to align current and future government funding 
innovation to mitigate any environmental 
around agreed priorities and to crowd-in effort 
impacts from new technologies on our 
and investment from the private sector and 
pathway to net zero.
research communities by providing a clear 
9. In each of these sectors, known  signal on our areas of focus.
technologies, business models, services and 
approaches will need to be demonstrated 
and then deployed at scale, while novel 
technologies need R&D support now to 
determine whether they can be affordable and 
viable options in the longer-term. Underpinning 
209Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Government R&D Support deliver emissions savings across the natural 
resources, waste and F-gases sectors, we 
11. Government investment in research 
are also committing to spend £75 million on 
drives progress on our goals, from the physics 
net zero related R&D in these sectors over the 
underpinning battery technology to the 
next three years.
mathematics underlying climate modelling. 
In November 2020, we committed to  14. We will prioritise innovations where 
increasing investment in core UK Research  there is a strong case for UK Government 
and Innovation (UKRI) and National Academy  investment, while leveraging additional funding 
funded research by more than £1 billion by the  from industry. It will also support the UK in 
April 2024 (the 2023/24 Financial Year). UKRI  maintaining its leadership in the development 
investment in research, innovation, and skills  of technologies such as nuclear reactors 
creates the conditions for the UK to address  and fusion energy,4 which are expected to 
the complex and interrelated challenges of  complement renewable sources in the future. 
achieving net zero by 2050.  With high levels of innovation alongside 
ambitious policy support in technologies, 
12. Beyond early-stage research, investment 
the UK’s low carbon sectors with the 
in new technologies is essential for bringing 
largest potential could unlock £60 billion of 
them closer to commercialisation. We will 
GVA in the UK.5
expand our cross government portfolio 
of net zero innovation support, delivering  15. The Industrial Strategy Challenge 
at least £1.5 billion during the next  Fund (ISCF),6 delivered by UKRI and its 
spending review period. This will accelerate  partners, drives UK growth and productivity 
the commercialisation of low carbon  by directing innovation across sectors and 
technologies, systems, and business models  disciplines behind government’s strategic 
across the economy.  priorities. ISCF has to date allocated £824 
million to eight challenges aligned to the 
13. The Transport Decarbonisation Plan 
2017 Industrial Strategy Clean Growth Grand 
committed to implementing a range of 
Challenge. Examples include the Transforming 
innovation programmes to support the 
Food Production Challenge; the Faraday 
decarbonisation of transport, with successful 
Battery Challenge; the Driving the Electric 
projects for zero emission road freight trials 
Revolution Challenge.
and hydrogen transport pilots recently 
announced. Building on the success of our  16. The government’s Innovation Strategy 
£20 million zero emission road freight trials, we  sets out our plans for a refreshed Innovation 
will expand these to trial three zero emission  Missions programme to build on UK 
HGVs technologies at scale on UK roads to  leadership in mission-driven innovation and 
determine their operational benefits, as well as  bring government together with industry, 
their infrastructure needs. The accompanying  civil society, and academia to respond 
Jet Zero: our strategy for net zero aviation  directly to major challenges confronting 
proposes a suite of policies to reduce  the UK. As referenced in the International 
aviation emissions, including accelerating the  chapter, Missions can play an important 
development of sustainable aviation fuels and  role in stimulating and leveraging innovation 
supporting the development of zero emission  for tackling complex problems while 
flight. The Agricultural Transition Plan set out  simultaneously promoting growth and 
the commitment to boost innovation and help  improved business outcomes and restoring 
farmers and growers increase productivity,  the UK’s place as a science superpower.
sustainability, and resilience to a changing 
climate. Given the importance of R&D to 
210Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
17. It is a strategic focus of our National  18. It is essential that we track cross-
Space Strategy to utilise space technology  government activity and ensure that innovation 
in the fight against climate change. Satellites  funding is strategically aligned to deliver the 
provide an extraordinary insight into our  government’s net zero ambition. This will be 
climate and environment and enable us  supported by the Net Zero Innovation Board 
to understand and monitor how climate  (NZIB), chaired by the UK Government’s Chief 
change is impacting the Earth. We will  Scientific Advisor.
strive to remain at the forefront of Earth 
19. Alongside our policies that specifically 
Observation (EO) technology and know-how. 
support our net zero objectives, there will 
This supports our ambition to be a global 
be continued significant public investment in 
science and technology superpower and to 
R&D to support all sectors. This includes the 
lead the world in tackling climate change and 
creation of a new institution – the Advanced 
biodiversity loss.
Research and Invention Agency (ARIA) – to 
fund high-risk, high-reward research. ARIA’s 
leadership will have full scope to determine the 
areas in which it will invest.
Case study: Hy4Heat Programme and Hydrogen Fuelled Appliances
The Hy4Heat programme was launched by BEIS in 2017 to explore the use 
of hydrogen gas for heating by seeking to demonstrate technical feasibility 
and safety. It aims to define quality and technical standards, and to develop 
domestic and commercial hydrogen appliances. The programme, with up to 
£25 million funded by BEIS, is supporting the innovation journey of a range 
of domestic hydrogen appliances and meters including world-first hydrogen-
ready boilers, cookers, and fires.
These hydrogen appliances and meters are being installed at a hydrogen 
home facility, developed in partnership with Northern Gas Networks (NGN) 
and Cadent. This will enable industry and members of the public to see how 
these appliances work in a home setting. These properties will be the first UK 
houses to demonstrate the use of hydrogen appliances in a real-world setting.
211Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Policy and regulatory frameworks 22. In Build Back Better: our plan for growth, 
and the Innovation Strategy, we set out our 
20. As set out in the Ten Point Plan and 
aim to unlock the potential of the £2.2 trillion 
Energy White Paper, we will continue 
held in UK pension schemes by addressing 
to develop a policy environment and 
barriers to long-term investment. The 
regulatory framework which incentivises 
government has established the Productive 
further deployment of new technologies, 
Finance Working Group, which published its 
services, and business models. The UK’s 
roadmap for increasing productive finance 
Electricity Market Reform is an example 
investment in September 2021,7 and is 
of how government can drive significant 
progressing policy development through 
cost reductions in low carbon technology. 
several Department for Work and Pensions 
Furthermore, while supporting the deployment 
consultations. These workstreams explore 
of offshore wind through the Contracts for 
ways to make it easier for schemes to invest in 
Difference scheme, costs have reduced by 
alternative assets, including equity investment 
>50% in the last decade. This provides a 
in innovative firms; creating the conditions for 
clear example of policy ‘pull’ whereby open 
capital to flow into the UK’s most promising 
competition worked to drive cost reductions 
firms will help ensure that finance is available 
through deployment and innovation. As 
for the innovation required to meet our net 
noted throughout the strategy, government 
zero goals and improve outcomes for UK 
will work with industry, businesses and 
savers. Government will continue to engage 
consumers to consider the removal of 
closely with pension funds and the investment 
regulatory barriers which may be hindering our 
industry to understand the scope for 
transition to net zero.
industry-led initiatives that take advantage of 
innovation investment opportunities.
Encouraging private sector 
investment 23. We will also provide the right conditions 
to attract private investment in R&D and 
21. To deliver net zero, it is essential that 
innovation, including through tax and 
public investment catalyses significant flows of 
regulatory frameworks as well as policy signals 
private investment into innovative companies 
from government. At Spring Budget 2021, 
and activities. This means creating the right 
the Government announced a review of R&D 
conditions for all businesses to innovate and 
tax reliefs with the publication of a wide-
giving them the confidence to do so. The right 
ranging consultation. The review will ensure 
conditions will often involve de-risking capital 
that the reliefs are up-to-date, competitive 
in the forms of grants (allowing freedom to 
and well-targeted.
innovate) and concessionary capital (allowing 
businesses to commercialise and scale their 
operations). Providing the private sector 
with clarity on government R&D priorities 
can also help to build the confidence to 
invest in innovative companies and activities. 
As outlined, our Net Zero Research & 
Innovation Framework sets out a structure 
for this and a future update will demonstrate 
how the government is delivering against 
this Framework.
212Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Case study: Energy 
Entrepreneur’s Fund (EEF)
Since 2012, the UK government’s Energy  several achievements including supporting the 
Entrepreneurs Fund (EEF) has awarded  displacement of over 21 million kilograms of 
£72 million worth of grants, supported 156  CO  per year and it will also help to lower the 
2
projects, and leveraged more than £500  Levelised Cost of Energy (LCOE) with a 30% 
million in private investment – a figure that  reduction in comparison to other FOW designs 
is still growing. The EEF supplies innovation  and comparable offshore fixed installations. 
grants for SMEs and start-up companies to  AEP’s research and testing has also reduced 
back the development and demonstration of  the operating costs including low-cost 
disruptive technologies whilst also supporting  deployment and reduced dependency on 
our decarbonisation targets. specialist vessels. A new company has been 
formed – Axis Energy TLB Ltd. – which 
Axis Energy Projects (AEP) was funded with 
will enable the commercialisation of the 
over £200,000 with £40,000 of match-funding 
technology, having secured trademarks and 
from the private sector. AEP tested floating 
patents around the world. A recent report 
offshore wind (FOW) technology in Edinburgh, 
from the Offshore Renewable Energy Catapult 
Scotland simulating how FOW can be resistant 
(OREC) predicts that the UK FOW industry 
to 100-year storm events in water depths of 
could support up to 17,000 jobs by 2050 
65 – 100 metres. The project has increased 
and generate a gross value added (GVA) 
technology readiness levels from 3 (research) 
of £33.6 billion.
to 6/7 (deployment). The programme has had 
213Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Wider support International collaboration and 
leadership
24. Non-financial support in the form of 
engagement with businesses is also key to  26. Building on our approach domestically, 
the development and deployment of new  we are committed to continued active 
technologies, systems, policies and business  membership of Mission Innovation as the 
models to achieve net zero. This includes,  primary forum to strengthen international 
for example, support provided through  cooperation on clean energy innovation which 
UKRI, its Knowledge Transfer Network, and  is essential for our long-term climate and 
other bodies like the Catapult network and  energy goals. An ambitious second phase of 
Intellectual Property Office. It also includes  Mission Innovation is a priority for government. 
UKRI’s digital platform pilot programme, which  We will provide global leadership and commit 
will be used to bring net zero businesses  to co-leading missions to build a renewable-
together with investors for deal flow and  powered future and deliver low cost, low 
to make information on companies more  carbon hydrogen.
accessible to investors. The Innovation 
27. Elsewhere, UK participation in Horizon 
Strategy set out how we will build on this 
Europe, the world’s largest collaborative 
important support and provide advice, 
research programme worth around €95 
networking opportunities, skills development, 
billion over the next decade, will help us 
and testing facilities. This includes a new 
reach our net zero goals. With a minimum 
online Innovation hub from Innovate UK, which 
of 35% of funding earmarked for climate 
will make it easier for businesses to navigate 
change projects, this collaboration with other 
the government’s funding offer, and expansion 
world leaders in net zero research will drive 
of the Innovate EDGE service which helps 
further progress.
firms to enhance their investment readiness. 
More detail on our approach to green jobs and 
28. Further detail on government’s plans for 
skills is set out in the Green jobs, skills, and 
international collaboration and leadership, 
industries chapter.
including Mission Innovation, can be found in 
the International leadership and collaboration 
25. The Innovation Strategy also set out 
chapter of the strategy.
our ambition for government departments 
to procure more innovative solutions. 
Departments will produce clear policy problem 
statements that describe the priority outcomes 
that they want to solve or achieve. Alongside 
this, every major project8 should publish 
an outcome statement. Both measures will 
improve demand-signalling from departments, 
allowing them to procure innovation to 
accelerate the UK’s transition to net zero. This 
will help us to leverage public procurement as 
a tool that drives greener and more resilient 
outcomes across public services.
214Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Case study: Horizon 2020
•  Secure, Clean and Efficient Societal 
Challenge - Between 2014 and 2020, 
around €5.9 billion was allocated through 
Horizon 2020, to support non-nuclear 
research through the Secure, Clean 
and Efficient Energy Societal Challenge. 
This aimed to support transition to a 
sustainable and competitive system 
focused on efficiency, low carbon 
technologies and smart cities.
•  Nova Innovation - Nova is an Edinburgh-
based tidal energy device and project 
developer based in Edinburgh and 
Shetland. Nova was awarded a total of 
€32.9 million in funding from Horizon 2020, 
including €20 million funding from Societal 
Challenge for Secure, Clean and Efficient 
Energy for their projects investigating 
tidal energy. The project allowed Nova to 
access infrastructure that is not available 
in the UK, for example testing facilities in 
the Netherlands, and provided networking 
opportunities that led to Nova working with 
major multinational companies to create 
bespoke components.
215Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
4ii. Green Investment
Leading the world in green finance
Our Key Commitments
•  Use the UK Infrastructure Bank (UKIB) to crowd in private finance, support more 
than £40 billion of investment, and pull through low carbon technologies and 
sectors to maturity and scale.
•  Continue to issue green gilts following the success of the UK’s debut sovereign 
green bond in September 2021, which aims to raise a minimum of £15 billion this 
financial year. Issue a National Savings & Investment Green Retail Savings Product.
•  Support the British Business Bank’s new objective to incorporate net zero and 
wider environmental, social and governance strategy across all activity, as well 
as the updated FCA and Bank of England’s remit reflecting the importance of 
environmental sustainability and the transition towards net zero.
•  Introducing new Sustainability Disclosures Requirements through Greening Finance: 
A Roadmap to Sustainable Investing, including through:
–  Becoming the first G20 country to make disclosures aligned to the Taskforce 
for Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) mandatory across 
the UK economy.
–  Developing a UK Green Taxonomy and creating the Green Technical Advisory 
Group to advise on greenwashing and how to implement the taxonomy 
in a UK context.
•  We published our roadmap setting out our approach to sustainability disclosures 
ahead of COP26. This includes a commitment to publish a second iteration of the 
Green Finance Strategy for the UK which will outline the pathway to net zero for 
finance in the UK.
•  We will work with external partners and data providers to better track private 
investment into the net zero economy going forward.
216Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
The challenge
1. Both public and private investment will  2. Our 2019 Green Finance Strategy 
be crucial for any path to net zero. While  demonstrated how the strategic use of public 
we expect most investment to come from  funds, long-term policy frameworks, and 
the private sector, market failures mean  signalling can leverage private investment into 
the private sector alone will not deliver  the technologies and infrastructure that will be 
emissions reductions and innovation at  needed to deliver net zero. Each technology 
the pace required. and sector will present its own challenges, 
and long-term government support for a large 
pipeline of projects will be needed.
Our goal
3. We will work with the private sector to  5. This will mean supporting the full funding 
deliver a world-leading net zero financial  cycle, from emerging technologies through 
system, ready to seize the opportunities of  to infrastructure and project finance, to 
net zero. Climate-related financial risk will be  deliver the economic transition. Each green 
embedded into our regulatory frameworks to  technology and infrastructure will require 
help guide capital flows to green investments.  different types of financial support depending 
on its maturity, as shown in figure 28. We 
4. We estimate that additional capital 
must engage all types of capital, from early-
investment must grow from present levels 
stage grant and angel investment through to 
to an average of £50-60bn per year through 
institutional finance like pension fund investors.
the late 2020s and 2030s. Most of this 
investment will come from the private sector,  6. The UK is a world leading financial 
providing new opportunities for businesses  hub, with access to global capital pools, 
and investors.   outstanding professional services, and a 
robust legal and regulatory framework. As 
such, the UK financial services industry is 
poised to enable private capital to flow into our 
net zero investment needs. 
217Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Figure 27 - Public Finance Interventions across the different stages of 
commercialisation9
Research and  Commercial  Build  Proven commercial  Capital markets 
development prototype and scale proposition ready
Start-ups/Corporate R&D Scale up & Growth Scale
Financial independence
More government support Less government support
Supporting framework 
Financing Green Green skills Greening the financial system NZ aligned regulation
Sovereign 
Green Bond UK Green 
Taxonomy
7. Public funds will be used strategically to  8. Providing the suitable conditions for 
support new technologies, as well as emerging  regulatory and early-stage innovation is a 
sectors, as they move from the innovation  significant part of our Net Zero Strategy, but 
stage through to commercialisation and  we must also mobilise the wider financial 
deployment. Early-stage R&D is supported  sector to meet the upfront investment 
by various government grants. Later-stage  challenge. This means stimulating new ways 
organisations can reach commercialisation  of providing information to markets on green 
and benefit from investment through the Clean  investment and exposure to climate related 
Growth Venture Capital (VC) Fund or support  financial risk, and providing the investment 
from the British Business Bank (BBB). These  conditions to mobilise private capital into a 
stages of support are essential for scaling the  portfolio of net zero financing.
necessary technologies and supporting the 
growth of businesses aligned to meeting our 
net zero ambitions.
218Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
9. We are driving more disclosure and  11. This builds on the growing voluntary 
transparency in the markets on climate risks  commitments from financial institutions to a 
and opportunities through the introduction of  net zero transition that are already pivoting 
Sustainability Disclosure Requirements, as  financial flows towards net zero in the run-up 
outlined in Greening Finance: A Roadmap to  to COP26.10  For example, the Glasgow 
Sustainable Investing. These bring together  Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ), 
and streamline UK sustainability reporting  which was launched as part of the COP26 
requirements, including reporting aligned with  Presidency, brings together many of the 
the Taskforce for Climate-Related Financial  world’s biggest banks, asset owners, asset 
Disclosures (TCFD) recommendations and UK  managers, insurers and service providers that 
Green Taxonomy disclosures.  are credibly committed to achieving net zero 
emissions. Using the UN’s Race to Zero as the 
10. Targeted public intervention via the British 
entry criteria, the gold standard for net zero 
Business Bank (BBB), UK Export Finance 
commitments, GFANZ has raised, deepened, 
and the UK Infrastructure Bank (UKIB) will pull 
and broadened the global financial sector’s 
through investment from the private sector. For 
net zero ambitions. GFANZ has launched as 
instance, British Patient Capital, a commercial 
ambitious body of technical work to support 
subsidiary of the BBB, is contributing to the 
net zero aligned investment and accelerate the 
transition to net zero through its existing 
transition to a net zero financial system and 
investment strategy: 9% of its underlying 
global economy. 
investment portfolio is in clean growth, 
sustainability, and mobility companies.  12. We will publish an update to the Green 
Finance Strategy in 2022 which will include a 
net zero transition pathway for the UK financial 
sector. This will set out how this crucial sector 
will transition to net zero as a whole.
219Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Financing green
13. The scale of the net zero challenge and  14. The pathways set out in this strategy 
persistent market failures mean that public  demonstrate that, whilst each sector requires 
sector intervention is needed to shape and  its own policy framework, there are cross-
accelerate the flow of private capital. The  cutting interventions required to support the 
right policy signals can act as a catalyst for  transition to net zero. We will replicate the 
private sector investment, as shown by by £90  success of offshore wind and take actions 
billion of new investment in renewable energy  to secure access to finance across the 
since 2012, in part facilitated by the Electricity  economy, ensuring that all sectors are able to 
Market Reforms (EMR).11 By bringing down  access private investment going forward. For 
the cost of capital through strong policy  example, the Industrial Decarbonisation and 
frameworks, we will reduce the financing costs  Hydrogen Revenue Support (IDHRS) scheme 
of reaching net zero, delivering a better deal  (see paragraph 19), will unlock private sector 
for the taxpayer. capital for industrial carbon capture and 
hydrogen production projects by providing 
long-term certainty to investors, de-risking 
revenue streams in these sectors.
Figure 28 - Low carbon sectors commercial maturity and associated capital 
requirements12
Research and  Commercial  Build  Proven commercial  Capital markets 
development prototype and scale proposition ready
Start-ups/R&D Scale up & Growth Scale
Low Carbon  Long-term Electrification  Offshore 
Hydrogen energy storage of transport wind
Advanced
CC&S Sector 
Nuclear Energy Efficiency 
financial 
Retrofits
independence
Financial risk / 
Nature based 
cost of capital
solutions
Revenue 
Net Zero  Clean support: 
Innovation  Growth business  UK Infra 
Portfolio Fund models Bank
More Government Financing  Less Government Financing 
VC investment funds  Institutional investors
Corporate ventures
Grants Crowdfunding  e.g . LGIM, HSBC, 
Private Equity, Infrastructure Funds & Banks
VCT/(S)EIS funds pension funds, etc
Supporting framework 
Financing Green Green skills Greening the financial system NZ aligned regulation
Sovereign  UK Green 
Green Bond Taxonomy
220Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
15. Through the net zero innovation portfolio,  18. Going beyond SME finance to larger scale 
funding is provided for low carbon technology  infrastructure finance, there are significant 
innovation. As these technologies, and  pools of private finance ready to deploy into 
sectors, commercialise, they can benefit from  UK projects but there can be a mismatch 
further investment readiness support to help  between market appetite and the risk profile of 
them access repayable private finance. For  projects. Infrastructure investment is vulnerable 
example, the Natural Environment Investment  to market failure, as it is often complex, large, 
Readiness Fund (NEIRF),13 launched by Defra  novel and long-term. Launched in June 2021, 
and the Environment Agency in 2021, will build  the new UK Infrastructure Bank can play a 
the portfolio of potential investments for net  pivotal role in this space, crowding in private 
zero investors in nature. sector investment in important areas and 
helping to kick start new sectors. Across the 
16. Some of these technologies may also 
Bank’s full mandate (also covering regional 
avail of venture capital to allow them to scale 
growth), it has £12 billion of equity and debt 
rapidly. Government has shown its support 
capital and will be able to deploy £10 billion of 
for this necessary innovation underpinning 
government guarantees. We expect the Bank  
its clean growth objectives with a £20 million 
to use this to crowd in private investment as 
cornerstone investment in the venture capital 
a cornerstone investor or guarantor to enable 
Clean Growth Fund14. This Fund aims to 
more than £40 billion of investment in the 
accelerate the deployment of innovative clean 
areas most prone to market failure, and to 
technologies that reduce greenhouse gas 
help deliver its dual policy focus of tackling 
emissions, alongside catalysing the UK clean 
climate change and supporting regional and 
growth venture capital market and leveraging 
local economic growth. Furthermore, the 
private sector funding into early-stage clean 
Bank will play a pivotal role in catalysing the 
tech start-ups. For example, the fund led a 
role of local government in the transition, by 
£4.7 million investment round into Piclo (the 
financing strategic infrastructure projects led 
independent energy trading marketplace) with 
by local authorities, and providing advice and 
co-investment from Mott MacDonald Ventures.
expertise in order to strengthen the pipeline of 
17. The BBB is a government-owned  investable projects.
economic development bank with a mission to 
19. Industries will need to be supported in 
drive sustainable growth and prosperity across 
their transition away from high carbon emitting 
the UK, and to enable the transition to a net 
operations. For example, the IDHRS scheme 
zero economy, by improving access to finance 
will provide a revenue mechanism to enable 
for smaller businesses. UK Government has 
deployment of industrial carbon capture and 
worked with the BBB on their new mission 
hydrogen production. UK Export Finance 
and objective to support the UK’s transition 
(UKEF)’s Transition Export Development 
to a net zero economy and incorporate 
Guarantees (TEDG), launched in 2020, will 
environmental, social and governance issues 
ensure that businesses, including those in the 
across of its activities. The new net zero 
supply chain, are supported at all stages of 
objective will support firms looking to move 
their transition journey. This product can be 
towards net zero, helping the UK reduce its 
used by a company for working capital, capital 
energy consumption and mitigate the impacts 
expenditure or R&D needs, provided they have 
of climate change.
a credible transition plan. The first TEDG was 
announced in August with UKEF providing 
an 80% guarantee on the £430 million 
commercial loan to Wood Plc. This support 
from UKEF will help Wood to continue to 
capitalise on opportunities linked to clean 
221Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
energy, hydrogen and decarbonisation.  22. Furthermore, the government is 
Furthermore, this instrument will support the  supporting the development of a Taskforce 
export of low carbon technology from the  on Nature-Related Financial Disclosures 
UK as evidenced by this guarantee which will  (TNFD). This will provide a framework for 
support Wood to take advantage of green  corporate and financial institutions to report 
trade opportunities. and act on evolving nature-related risks to 
support a shift in global financial flows away 
20. The UK financial system is also taking a 
from nature-negative outcomes and toward 
global leadership role transition financing and 
nature-positive outcomes. This market-led, 
sustainable finance more widely. An example 
global initiative will build, consult on, and test, 
of transition finance leadership is the London 
its framework over the next 2 years and will be 
Stock Exchange Group (LSEG) which was the 
designed to complement the TCFD by building 
first exchange globally to launch a dedicated 
on its 4-pillar approach and drawing on its 
Transition Bond Segment. This distinct 
lessons learnt.
transition label is the application of globally 
recognised standards, enhancing visibility  23. These interventions are important to 
and providing assurance to issuers and  driving the desired ‘nature-positive’ future. 
investors. We have seen the financial sector  As set out in the Prime Minister’s Ten Point 
in the UK take the lead in net zero transition  Plan, we hope that the UK will also become 
(for example, through the Glasgow Financial  a leader in high-quality voluntary carbon 
Alliance for Net Zero15) as well as leading  markets (VCMs). For these private markets to 
financial innovation (such as Green Home  scale successfully in support of net zero, their 
Finance Innovation fund). integrity and use as an addition (rather than 
alternative) to rapid decarbonisation will be 
21. The Chancellor, in his Mansion House 
critical. The government is closely following 
speech16 in July 2021, set out how the 
the important work of various sector-led 
government will ensure that the financial 
initiatives including: the Taskforce for Scaling 
system in the UK plays a major role in the 
Voluntary Carbon Markets (TSVCM); the 
delivery of the UK’s net zero target and 
Voluntary Carbon Markets Integrity Initiative 
ambition for a ‘nature positive’ future. This will 
UK VCM Forum; and, the Financing UK Nature 
build on the investment principles outlined 
Recovery coalition.
in the 25 Year Environment Plan including 
‘do no significant harm’ to the environment  24. The UK Government issued its inaugural 
with investment, and implement a series of  green gilt on 21 September 2021. This was 
programmes aimed at building the portfolio  a landmark transaction for sterling markets 
of investable assets across the UK. This will  and the UK. At £10 billion, it was the largest 
involve providing grant programmes like the  sovereign green bond issuance to date and 
Natural Environment Investment Readiness  attracted the largest ever order book for a 
Fund (NEIRF) to help nature-based projects  sovereign green bond. The inaugural green 
become investment ready, but also providing  gilt also achieved the largest “greenium” for 
capital through public-private impact funds  any debut sovereign green bond to date, 
such as the Big Nature Impact Fund to  demonstrating good value for money for 
leverage in private finance. In addition to  the taxpayer (a “greenium” refers to more 
investing in climate and environmental  favourable pricing achieved by the issuer 
solutions, government is also committed  of a green bond compared to that for a 
to ensuring sufficient private capital is  hypothetical, equivalent conventional bond).  
available for investment into adaptation and  The UK will then be following up with a second 
resilience measures.  issuance in mid-to-late October, as the UK 
looks to build out a green yield curve. This 
222Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
followed the successful publication of the UK  26. We are also committed to tracking 
Government Green Financing Framework on  finance flows, to complement how we 
30 June 2021, which outlines how proceeds  measure carbon. Hence, we will be working 
raised from the green gilts will help tackle  with external partners and data providers 
climate change, biodiversity loss and other  to better track private investment into the 
environmental challenges. net zero economy going forward. This will 
enable the UK to robustly, and regularly, 
25. NS&I will issue its retail Green Savings 
assess the alignment of the UK’s financial 
Bonds later in 2021. These bonds will be 
flows with net zero.
the first standalone retail product to be tied 
to a sovereign’s green bond framework  27. The UK launched the Green Finance 
and will allow all UK savers to contribute  Education Charter in our 2019 Green 
to the fight against climate change and the  Finance Strategy,17 reflecting the need for 
government’s other environmental objectives. UK and global financial services industries 
It gives UK savers the opportunity to take  to develop the capabilities of their workforce 
part in this collective effort to tackle climate  in green finance principles and practice. 
change by contributing to public spending  Since then, twelve leading professional 
on green, whilst increasing awareness  bodies representing over 1 million finance 
in the government’s green initiatives.  professionals have signed up to the Charter, 
This series of wholesale and retail green  hosted by the Green Finance Institute. To 
financing issuances demonstrate the UK’s  further build UK capacity, capability and 
commitment to sustainable finance ahead of  climate leadership, we will look to expand 
COP 26 in November. Charter membership to universities and others, 
and work with the Institute for Apprenticeships 
and Technical Education (IfATE). We will 
also seek to internationalise the Charter by 
encouraging similar development overseas.
223Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Case study: The Green Finance 
Institute model
The Green Finance Institute (GFI) was  •  In September 2020, the CEEB launched 
established in 2019 with funding from HMG  the Green Home Finance Principles, 
and the City of London Corporation, though it  in collaboration with the Loan Markets 
operates independently of government and is  Association, to embed transparency 
commercially focused. and consistency into the green home 
finance market. Today, the Principles have 
Sitting at the nexus between the public and 
supported 11 financial institutions with 
private sectors, the GFI provides critical 
combined mortgage balances of +£480 
guidance to government and the financial 
billion to launch, or commit to launch, 
sector and delivers programmes which 
green lending products that minimise the 
mobilise investment and lending towards real 
risk of greenwashing.
economy outcomes. Through the application 
•  The Coalition for the Decarbonisation of 
of the GFI’s rigorously designed financing 
Road Transport (CRDT) was established 
solutions, they have already identified and 
in May 2021 to unlock financial barriers to 
co-designed effective interventions that have 
the decarbonisation of road transport and 
deployed capital towards a net zero, carbon 
enabling infrastructure.
resilient economy.
•  The GFI played a key role in the Dasgupta 
The GFI primarily operates by convening 
Review and is also working on a series 
and leading coalitions of global experts 
of potentially transformative funding 
that focus on different sectors and seek 
mechanisms to support the UK’s 25-year 
to identify scalable financial solutions that 
Environment Plan alongside Defra and the 
accelerate sector-specific transitions to a 
Environment Agency.
low carbon future.
•  The GFI was appointed Chair and 
There are several coalitions and initiatives that  convener of the Green Technical 
the GFI now operate: Advisory Group (GTAG), tasked with 
providing independent expert advice 
•  The Coalition for the Energy Efficiency 
to government on how to implement a 
of Buildings (CEEB) is the GFI’s flagship 
taxonomy in the UK.
programme, set up in 2019 to develop the 
market for financing a net-zero climate- •  The GFI is also hosting the Executive 
resilient built environment. Today, the CEEB  Secretariat for the Taskforce on Nature-
has over 300 members and accounts for  related Disclosures and launching an 
70% of the UK mortgage market. This  initiative this November to unlock the 
work is now expanding into Europe. barriers to channel private finance towards 
nature in the UK.
•  In partnership with the City of London 
Corporation, the GFI will host a Green 
Horizon Summit at COP26, which 
will focus on mobilising capital in the 
transition to net zero.
224Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Greening finance
28. Financing the technologies required for  31. Alongside measures to implement 
our transition to net zero is only part of the  mandatory disclosures aligned with the TCFD 
solution. The transition represents both a  recommendations for companies and LLPs:
risk and an opportunity for the real economy 
•  The Financial Conduct Authority has 
and the financial system that supports it. It 
already introduced a listing rule for 
is therefore vital that climate-related financial 
premium listed companies which 
risks and impacts are factored into investment 
commenced on 1 January 2021. This 
decisions and reflected in the cost of finance 
requires companies to include a statement 
for different technologies and companies. To 
in their annual financial report which 
achieve this, we will harness the international 
sets out whether their disclosures are 
reputation of the UK’s leading financial sector 
consistent with the recommendations 
to encourage private investment to support 
of the TCFD, and to explain why if they 
low carbon innovation and manage climate-
have not done so.
related financial risk.
•  Government introduced regulations, in 
29. As the Chancellor outlined in his Mansion 
force from 1 October 2021, to require 
House speech,18 the government intends 
pension schemes with £5 billion or more 
to introduce economy-wide Sustainability 
in assets to report line with the TCFD’s 
Disclosure Requirements covering the whole 
recommendations. By October 2022, 
economy. This will include requirements to 
over 80% of members of occupational 
report on businesses and investment products 
pension schemes – and more than 70% 
impact on the climate and environment, as 
of assets under management – will be in 
well as the risks and opportunities these 
schemes reporting in line with the TCFD 
impacts pose to business. Our approach is 
recommendations.
detailed in Greening Finance: A Roadmap to 
Sustainable Investing. 32. Our stated objective is to increase the 
quantity and quality of climate-related financial 
30. The UK has already established itself as 
disclosures in a proportionate manner. This 
a world leader on green finance regulation, 
is to ensure market participants have better 
becoming the first G20 country to make 
information to adequately understand climate-
disclosures aligned with the Task Force on 
related financial risks and opportunities to 
Climate-related Financial Disclosures (TCFD) 
support the transition to net zero.
recommendations fully mandatory across the 
economy by 2025. As part of the roadmap  33. In November 2020, the Chancellor 
to delivery, BEIS consulted earlier in the  announced that the government is 
year on mandatory climate-related financial  implementing a UK Green Taxonomy. 
disclosures by publicly quoted companies,  This will clearly set out the criteria which 
large private companies and the largest  specific economic activities must meet to 
Limited Liability Partnerships (LLPs) from the  be considered environmentally sustainable. 
6th April 2022. Following widespread support  The first two Technical Screening Criteria 
for the proposals, we will shortly be setting out  (TSC) on climate change mitigation and 
regulations to bring this into force, including a  adaptation will be made by the end of 2022. 
requirement for scenario analysis - a powerful  To support the development of the TSCs, we 
tool to support companies in their assessment  have since announced the appointment of a 
of climate-related risks and opportunities. Green Technical Advisory Group (GTAG) in 
June 2021. Made up a of range of financial 
225Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
and business stakeholders, taxonomy and  34. Key to delivering enhanced disclosure 
data experts, and subject matter experts,  on climate change is the availability of data 
and chaired by the Green Finance Institute,  financial institutions can use. The UK Centre 
this will provide independent, non-binding  for Greening Finance and Investment (CGFI) 
advice to the government on developing and  is a national centre established to accelerate 
implementing a Green Taxonomy in the UK  the adoption and use of climate and 
context. For example, we have established  environmental data and analytics by financial 
an Energy Working Group as part of the  institutions internationally. CGFI will equip 
GTAG to provide advice on key technologies  financial institutions with the tools and capacity 
such as hydrogen and carbon capture and  required to effectively allocate capital to meet 
storage. Taken together, these enhanced  net zero ambitions and ensure global UK 
Sustainability Disclosure Requirements will  leadership in green finance and green finance 
support companies to communicate clear  data and analytics.
and credible low carbon transition plans 
needed by investors.
226Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Case study: Providing a net zero-
aligned regulatory environment
In March 2021, the Chancellor outlined his  •  In November 2020, the UK joint regulator 
recommendation to regulators that they  and government TCFD Taskforce, of 
should “have regard to the government’s  which the Bank is a member, published an 
commitment to achieve a net zero economy  interim report and roadmap for mandatory 
by 2050”. There has already been significant  TCFD-aligned disclosure requirements 
work by the Bank of England and the Financial  across the economy by 2025.
Conduct Authority.
•  The Bank has also sought to lead by 
example and in 2021 became the first 
The Bank of England
central bank to publish a climate-related 
The Bank’s approach to climate change is to  financial disclosure which included 
play a leading role, through its policies and  analysis of financial asset portfolios held 
operations, in ensuring the financial system,  for monetary policy purposes. The Bank 
the macroeconomy, and the Bank of England  also committed to reduce the emissions 
itself, are resilient to the risks from climate  from its physical operations to net-zero by 
change and supportive of the transition to a  2050 at the latest.
net zero emissions economy.
The Financial Conduct 
Recent actions to deliver this include: Authority (FCA)
•  In April 2019, the Bank published a 
The FCA’s work on climate change and 
comprehensive set of supervisory 
sustainable finance aims to make sure 
expectations for how banks and insurers 
market participants can manage the risks, 
should enhance their approaches to 
impacts and opportunities from moving to a 
managing the financial risks from climate 
more sustainable economy and can capture 
change. This was followed up in July 2020 
opportunities from the net zero transition. Key 
with a Dear CEO letter, which included 
developments in 2021 include:
additional guidance and set a deadline for 
firms to embed fully these expectations by  •  Introducing a TCFD-aligned Listing Rule 
the end of 2021. for premium-listed commercial companies, 
and consulting on new proposals to 
•  In June 2021 the Bank launched its 
extend the application of the rule to 
Climate Biennial Exploratory Scenario 
issuers of standard listed equity shares, 
(CBES) exercise to assess the resilience of 
and to implement new disclosure rules 
individual banks, insurers, and the wider 
for asset managers, life insurers, and 
UK financial system to three different 
FCA-regulated pension providers with 
climate scenarios. These scenarios 
a focus on the information needs of 
are based on those published by the 
clients and customers;
international central banks and supervisors 
Network for Greening the Financial  •  Co-chairing work on climate-related 
System (NGFS), of which the Bank is a  and sustainability disclosures at the 
founding member and where it chairs  International Organisation of Securities 
the workstream developing the NGFS  Commissions and the Financial 
climate scenarios. Stability Board;
227Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
•  Issuing a supervisory letter to the chairs 
of Authorised Fund Managers, including a 
set of guiding principles to help clarify the 
FCA’s expectations for the design, delivery 
and disclosure of retail responsible and 
sustainable funds – both as applications 
are submitted for authorisation and on 
an ongoing basis;
•  Launching a comprehensive innovation 
work programme on sustainability, 
including the announcement that the 
next cohort of the Digital Sandbox Pilot 
will focus on sustainability and climate 
change; the FCA has begun work with the 
City of London Corporation and industry 
to support the development of solutions 
to ESG data and disclosures issues 
via a digital testing environment, and is 
aiming for this environment to go live 
in Q1 2022; and,
•  Alongside the other financial regulators, 
publishing an inaugural Climate Adaptation 
Report (CAR) setting out the actions 
the FCA and financial services industry 
are taking to adapt to the challenges of 
climate change; the CAR will include a 
chapter on net zero which will explore 
net zero commitments, targets, tools 
and challenges.
2284iii. Green Jobs, Skills, 
and Industries
Creating the skilled workforce to deliver net zero and putting UK 
supply chains at the forefront of global markets 
Our Key Commitments
•  Publish sector and supply chain development plans for key low carbon sectors and 
work with business to encourage investment in green skills and industries in the UK.
•  Publish a UK Critical Minerals strategy, setting out our approach to securing 
technology-critical minerals and metals.
•  Support the development of a skilled, competitive supply chain for key green 
industries in the UK.
•  Reform the skills system so that training providers, employers and learners are 
incentivised and equipped to play their part in delivering the transition to net zero 
– including by legislating for skills required for jobs that support action on climate 
change and other environmental goals to be considered in the development of new 
local skills improvement plans.
•  Deliver a Lifetime Skills Guarantee and grow key post-16 training programmes 
(such as apprenticeships, Skills Bootcamps and T levels) in line with the needs of 
employers in the green economy, helping individuals get the training they need for 
a job in the green economy, either at the start of their careers or when retraining or 
upskilling once already in the workforce. 
•  Introduce a sustainability and climate change strategy for education and children’s 
services which will include a focus on equipping children and young people with the 
knowledge and skills they need to contribute to the green economy. Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
The Challenge
1. The national and global shift towards  3. We will need tens of thousands of 
net zero provides a once in a generation  engineers to build and maintain new offshore 
opportunity to level up the country, create new  wind farms off the coasts of northern 
green jobs, and put the UK at the forefront of  England and Scotland, construct nuclear 
growing global markets in green technologies.  power stations in the South of England, 
Delivering on this promise, whilst meeting our  and manufacture electric vehicles in the 
ambitious climate and environmental targets,  Midlands; skilled builders and trades people 
will be in a large part dependent on having  to retrofit homes and buildings across the 
a sufficiently skilled workforce and robust,  country; and conservation and biodiversity 
competitive supply chains in the UK.  professionals to deliver nature-based solutions 
to climate change.
2. Recent developments have thrown 
into sharp relief the inherent vulnerabilities  4. Alongside a broader shift to digitisation 
associated with complex global supply  and automation, we can expect the transition 
chains and shocks to the global economic  to net zero to be one of the dominant 
system. The transition to net zero will change  labour market trends in the next 30 years: 
the nature of the UK’s critical supply chains.  approximately 6.3 million jobs in the UK, about 
Our aim is to help ensure that supply chains  one in five, are likely to be affected by the 
critical for the transition to net zero are secure,  transition to a green economy, with workers 
ensuring that we have access to the materials,  experiencing either an increase or decrease in 
minerals, and chemicals that our growing  the demand for their skills.19
green economy will need. Our approach is that 
there is no “one size fits all” model for building 
resilience in individual supply chains: often a 
combination of levers may be the best solution 
to address a vulnerability.
230Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Our Goals
5. The government’s ambition is to: –  Reforming the skills system to 
make it more responsive to the 
•  Support up to 440,000 jobs across net 
needs of employers, so that training 
zero industries in 2030, contributing 
providers, employers, and workers are 
towards a broader pivot to a greener 
incentivised and equipped to support 
economy which could support 2 million 
the transition to net zero;
jobs in green sectors or by greening 
–  Ramping up support for workers 
existing sectors by:
in the high carbon economy to 
–  Working with business to grow  transition to green jobs;
green industries, supply chains and 
–  Working with business to ensure 
skills in the UK, and ensure our 
people from all backgrounds can 
resilience to international changes in 
access the opportunities in the 
supply chains; and,
green economy, including through 
–  Using our net zero policy and funding  career advice; and,
to promote the growth of green skills 
–  Providing children and young people 
and the green economy.
with the high-quality education and 
•  Enable workers, industries, and places  training they need to work in a future 
to transition to a net zero economy by  green career, through improving 
2050, and support industry to develop  teacher training and development 
the skilled workforce to deliver a green  in STEM and other key subjects, 
industrial revolution by: and expanding post-16 training 
programmes in line with the needs of 
the green economy.
231Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
The Green Jobs Taskforce
To better understand how the UK could grasp opportunities of the Green 
Industrial Revolution, the Department of Business, Energy and Industrial 
Strategy and the Department of Education launched the Green Jobs 
Taskforce in November 2020. The Taskforce provided an independent 
assessment of the potential skills and labour market impacts of the net 
zero transition, including how we can ensure green jobs are open to all and 
support workers to transition to the green economy. 
The independent Taskforce, which included representatives from industry, 
trade unions, the skills sector and community organisations, took a broad 
view of green jobs, as “employment in an activity that directly contributes 
to, or indirectly supports, the achievement of the UK’s net zero emissions 
target and other environmental goals, such as nature restoration and 
mitigation against climate risks.” Its report, published in July 2021, included 
15 recommendations for government, industry and the skills sector, which 
focused on three themes across the “life cycle” of green jobs: driving 
investment in net zero to support good quality green jobs in the UK; building 
pathways into good green careers; and supporting workers in the high carbon 
economy to transition. 
The ideas generated through the Taskforce and its engagement with industry 
have informed the development of this Strategy. 
232Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Working with business to grow green UK industries and resilient 
supply chains 
6. The investment needed for the transition  8. We also recognise that the starting 
to net zero will primarily be delivered by the  position when building resilience in critical 
private sector. As such, our first priority is  supply chains should be to take a market-
to provide businesses, investors, workers,  first approach. The UK prospers under 
and skills providers with policy certainty to  an open economy and openness itself 
unlock investment, ensuring we support green  confers resilience. We will leverage the UK’s 
industries to develop in the UK.  competitive strengths across the supply chain, 
while deploying those levers available to the 
7. In line with Build Back Better: Our Plan for 
Government – including UK Export Finance 
Growth, we are taking action across a range 
and the new Office for Investment – to ensure 
of low carbon industries with the greatest 
that we exploit our strengths, while supporting 
economic potential and competitive strength. 
those areas that could be vulnerable 
In doing so, we will support the growth of UK 
to global shocks.
supply chains and create new opportunities 
for UK businesses and level up the country. 
We are acting to build green industries such 
as offshore wind in North East England and 
in Scotland, carbon capture and hydrogen 
production in our industrial heartlands, electric 
vehicles manufacture in the midlands and 
Northeast of England, and the restoration and 
protection of nature in rural areas. 
233Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Case studies: Driving investment 
into green supply chains in the UK
The Prime Minister’s Ten Point Plan, and our  a package of measures including the Net 
subsequent sectoral strategies, put in place  Zero Hydrogen Fund (NZHF). The NZHF will 
a range of funding and policy initiatives to  kickstart the hydrogen economy in the early 
enable green industries and supply chains to  2020s by supporting projects with upfront 
develop in the UK, supporting our ambition to  costs, stimulating private sector investment, 
deliver on green jobs: and developing the pipeline of projects 
needed to deliver hydrogen production 
Building the Offshore Wind 
at scale by 2030.
Supply Chain 
Transforming automotive 
Announced as part of the Ten Point Plan, the 
manufacturing
UK’s offshore wind manufacturing industry has 
already seen almost £1.5 billion of investment  The UK is already capitalising on opportunities 
unlocked by the £160 million Offshore Wind  from the global shift to electric vehicles, as 
Manufacturing Investment Support scheme,  demonstrated by recent investments made 
which aims to further develop the UK’s  by Stellantis in Ellesmere Port, and Nissan 
offshore wind capabilities. The investments  and Envision AESC in Sunderland. Allocating 
have seen a significant boost over the summer  a further £350 million of our up to £1 billion 
with up to 3,600 jobs supported across the  Automotive Transformation Fund (ATF) to 
Humber region. This continues to lay the  support the electrification of UK vehicles and 
groundwork to deliver 40 GW of energy from  their supply chains. This will help  ensure 
offshore wind by 2030 and for UK businesses  the UK maximises the benefits from the 
and workers to take full advantage of the  transition to a zero emission vehicle future 
booming offshore market in the UK and  and support tens of thousands of high-quality 
internationally, support up to 60,000 jobs in  green jobs across the UK. Government 
the industry and its supply chain, and help  and industry have also jointly committed 
eliminate the UK’s contribution to carbon  around £1 billion through the Advanced 
emissions by 2050.20 Propulsion Centre for collaborative research 
and development in the next generation of 
We are preparing for the next wave of 
low carbon vehicle technologies. A further 
deployment around the UK, with world 
£318 million of government funding has been 
leading 1 GW deployment targets for 
provided to put the UK at the forefront of the 
innovative floating offshore wind turbines. 
design, development, and manufacturing of 
The government has set up a floating 
electric batteries through the Faraday Battery 
offshore wind demonstration programme 
Challenge and nearly £80 million to Driving 
to support development of state-of-the-art 
the Electric Revolution to accelerate growth 
technologies and products in the floating 
in the supply chain for power electronics, 
offshore wind industry.
machines and drives.
Net Zero Hydrogen Fund
Government has set an ambition to deploy 
5 GWs of low carbon hydrogen production 
capacity in the UK by 2030, supported by 
234Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Driving investment and jobs in the 
natural environment
Government’s Green Recovery Challenge 
Fund is supporting over 150 projects across 
England that are tackling climate change, 
restoring nature, and supporting 2,500 
green jobs. The Nature for Climate Fund is 
also contributing to net zero and creating 
and supporting green jobs by funding new 
woodland creation and peatland restoration. 
In addition, the £9 million Natural Environment 
Investment Readiness Fund is stimulating a 
pipeline of nature projects that can attract 
private sector investment.
235Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
9. We are working in partnership with our  11. The development of resilient, efficient, 
world-class sectors to enable them to take  and competitive supply chains will be a 
part in the transition, for example through the  collaborative strategic endeavour. To support 
North Sea Transition Deal, which committed  this, in May 2021 we published the CCUS 
to focusing on supporting the transformation  Supply Chain Roadmap, which sets out how 
of the oil and gas supply chain to service  government and industry can work together 
the low carbon energy sector. Building  to harness a strong UK supply chain, and 
on this, we have established the Energy  we have committed to publish a hydrogen 
Supply Chain Taskforce (UKESC) as a joint  sector development action plan in 2022, 
enterprise between industry and government  which will outline how the government will 
to guide policy making and maximise the  support companies to secure supply chain 
jobs and business opportunities from the  opportunities, skills and jobs in the sector. 
transition in the UK. The UKESCcover all  We will build on this by working with industry 
 
energy sectors and regions of the UK and,  to publish further sector and supply chain 
building on work already underway, it will  development plans for those low carbon 
map the energy project pipeline and identify  sectors where the UK has the potential 
higher value segments of the supply chain to  to capture an economic advantage. This 
prioritise in the UK.  will include ensuring we are resilient to 
international changes in supply caused by 
10. The Integrated Review Security, Defence, 
external shocks, including climate-related 
Development and Foreign Policy committed 
disruption, spikes in global demand, rising 
to ‘a resilient UK able to withstand and 
commodity costs, or artificial constraints 
proactively tackle the challenges of today 
on supply. For example, we will need to 
and the future’, including a specific focus on 
ensure we have access to a diverse range 
supply chain resilience, committing to ‘using 
of sources of chemicals, given they feed 
all our economic tools and our independent 
into 95% of our manufacturing base. As we 
trade policy to create economic growth that 
move forward, where possible, government 
is distributed more equitably across the UK 
will provide more visibility around planned 
and to diversify our supply chains in critical 
deployment cycles to increase the opportunity 
goods’. Similarly, the Plan for Growth outlines 
for suppliers to invest in long-term production, 
the importance of international markets to 
infrastructure, and training. 
ensuring diverse supply sources for the goods 
and services we need, improving the resilience 
of our supply chains and benefitting prosperity.
236Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Deep Dive - Critical Minerals, 
Supply Chains and Net Zero 
The transition to Net Zero means new supply  •  Ensuring the UK has a reliable supply of 
chains are becoming critical to the UK’s  critical minerals and metals;
energy production. Critical minerals are 
•  Establishing an enabling environment for 
metals and non-metals that are vital for a 
growing the sector in the UK;
defined economic activity and for the well-
•  Showing leadership through working 
being of the country, yet whose supply may 
bilaterally and multilaterally to support 
be at risk owing to geological distribution, 
work on international standards to extend 
lack of substitutes and/or other factors. 
and strengthen the circular economy in 
Such minerals provide materials essential 
technology-critical minerals;
for components in many of today’s rapidly 
growing clean energy technologies – from off- •  Ensuring our work to build critical mineral 
shore wind turbines to electric vehicles. The  supply chain resilience supports our 
World Bank suggests that the production of  international development priorities;
minerals such as graphite, lithium and cobalt,  •  Using our R&D resource to build a better 
could increase by nearly 500% by 2050 to  understanding of markets and prices to 
meet the growing demand.21  help mitigate the impact of supply shocks 
and demand spikes, and to enable better 
The government is committed to working 
foresight and early intervention; and,
with industry and with international partners 
to safeguard these supply chains and our  •  Work with UK industry (including 
future economic resilience. We are actively  SMEs) to consider how private and 
supporting the adoption of transparent, ethical  public sectors can better share risks 
and responsible mining practices, reflecting  to promote investment and drive 
environmental, social and governance (ESG)  innovation at all levels.
considerations, and are participating in the 
We will support the engagement of the UK’s 
development of global standards through the 
mining sector in new and existing markets, 
British Standards Institution.  
facilitating investment and collaboration in 
We will establish an Expert Committee on  extraction and processing opportunities. We 
Critical Minerals to provide independent advice  will also champion free and open global trade 
to government on the scope and content of  including through Free Trade Agreements to 
a critical minerals strategy and will publish  support this ambition and will explore use of 
an updated list of these minerals to guide  Freeports to support opportunities for the UK 
investment decisions. We will establish a  to develop as a critical minerals processing 
Critical Minerals Intelligence Centre to provide  hub supplying Europe and beyond. 
robust, dynamic analysis on stocks and flows 
to guide our decision-making.
Going forward, the government will publish a 
UK Critical Minerals strategy in 2022, setting 
out our approach to securing the technology-
critical minerals and metals aimed at:
237Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Supporting workers, industries, and places to transition and 
develop the skills needed to deliver net zero
12. There are urgent and emerging skills  14. The impact of the transition on the labour 
challenges across the green economy which  market will not be evenly spread across the 
we will need to address over the short and  UK, reflecting the geographical distribution 
long term if we are to meet our ambitions  of where existing industries will need to 
for a Green Industrial Revolution. We aim  adapt and others new ones will flourish.29 
to quadruple our offshore wind capacity  However, there are opportunities for workers 
to 40 GW, with the growth in this sector  in transitioning sectors, such as oil and gas, 
supporting up to 60,000 jobs in 2030.22 In  to utilise their specialist skills in key important 
the construction and heating sectors, up  green sectors, sectors such as hydrogen and 
to 230,000 skilled trades people could be  CCUS with these two sectors expected to 
required in 2030 to deliver the retrofitting of  grow from the middle part of this decade.
houses23 and to meet our ambition of installing 
600,000 heat pumps a year by 2028, we 
will need to rapidly increase the number 
of qualified installers from around 3,000 to 
35,000 within the next 7 years.24 As the 
automotive manufacturing sector transforms 
to producing electric vehicles, as many as 
50,000 workers in the UK’s automotive 
manufacturing sector could need reskilling by 
2025.25 In forestry and its supporting sectors, 
industry estimates point to projected labour 
demand of approximately 2,000 jobs over the 
next five years.26
13. As well as specialists in these sectors, 
employers will also need workers with 
wider cross-cutting skills to deliver net zero, 
including digital and data skills, project 
management, communications and change 
management. 27 There will also be increased 
need to work in a multidisciplinary way due 
to the way work will change in some sectors 
such as whole house retrofitting will need 
knowledge of multiple technologies.28
238Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Working with industry and key partners to support good green 
jobs and skills
15. Industry and government will need  18. We want to see continuous improvement 
to take action to ensure the UK has the  in the quality of jobs in the UK, both in the 
skilled workforce to deliver net zero and that  creation of new high-quality jobs which 
workers, industries and places are supported  support Government priorities such as net 
on the transition. This will be particularly  zero, and through in-work progression. We will 
important given the pace and scale of the  continue to drive this agenda forward through 
change, and the specific challenges faced  the Employment Bill, which will support our 
by smaller companies in some sectors and  ambition to make the UK the best place in the 
supply chains. To drive this forward we have  world to work and grow a business, and the 
announced a cross-cutting delivery group  cross-cutting delivery group will consider how 
to include representatives from industry, the  government and industry can work together to 
skills sector and other key stakeholders to  ensure green jobs are good jobs.
support the development and delivery of 
19. While skills policy is a devolved 
the Government’s plans for green jobs and 
matter, the Government also welcomes 
skills. We will set out further details of the 
close engagement with the devolved 
membership and mandate of the cross-cutting 
administrations, Mayoral Combined Authorities 
delivery group later this year. 
and the Greater London Authority, on this 
16. To support this work, and monitor our  agenda, to ensure everyone across the UK 
progress, it is vital that we continue to develop  has access to green skills and jobs. 
the evidence on how net zero will impact jobs 
and skills. The Office for National Statistics 
will seek to refine our understanding and 
measurement of the green economy as the 
UK transitions to net zero, including looking 
at such issues as quality of work and diversity 
within the green economy.
17. Join up between local bodies, employers 
and local communities will be key to ensuring 
an effective transition. Building on the 
measures set out in the Local Climate Action 
chapter, and our skills system reforms, we will 
assess how local areas are working to support 
workers and communities with the net zero 
transition across England.
239Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Working together across the UK 
Examples of policy action by the Scottish  Scotland
Government, Welsh Government and Northern 
The Scottish Government has set out a 
Ireland Executive
package of measures to create good, 
Northern Ireland Executive  green jobs, reskill those that need it and 
provide a career platform for the next 
The forthcoming Green Growth Strategy, will 
generation. It includes:
be a multi-decade strategy to balance climate, 
environment and the economy. It means a  •  a £100 million Green Jobs Fund to help 
move from a high to a low greenhouse gas  businesses create new, green jobs. 
emissions economy to improve people’s  Related funding will make focused 
quality of life through green jobs and a  investments in machinery and equipment 
clean environment. and research and development in 
five priority sectors: energy transition; 
Innovation is key to the disruptive transition 
transport; manufacturing; construction; 
required. ‘10X Economy’ sets out the vision 
agriculture and land use;
for the 2020s as a decade of innovation 
•  a £25 million National Transition Training 
bringing opportunity and growth.  The focus 
Fund with a focus on: 
on innovation is reinforced in the Energy 
Policy Options paper also strongly advocating 
–  The provision of green skills;
innovation. New skills will be critical to allow 
–  A Young Person’s Guarantee for 
innovation to flourish into delivery. The Skills 
16-24 year olds;
Strategy consultation recognises that a 
transformational change in skills is required to  –  The use of public procurement to build 
take advantage of Northern Ireland’s scale, yet  low carbon supply chains.
addressing the challenges in the skills sector. 
The Climate Emergency Skills Action Plan 
To take one example, the decarbonisation of  (CESAP) sets out a clear direction for the 
gas infrastructure will involve the development  change of Scotland’s skills system, and 
of new supply chains for production of  signals the role that businesses, communities 
biomethane from anaerobic digestion plants  and individuals across Scotland will play in 
and development of hydrogen production  achieving this. 
technologies, which will support green jobs 
The CESAP focuses on immediate action 
and new skills in these sectors.
as well as the longer-term systemic change 
that needs to take place by 2045. It is being 
driven by  senior representatives of central 
and local government and its agencies, skills 
providers, industry and independent experts, 
and is chaired by Professor Dave Reay of 
Edinburgh University.
The Scottish Government’s Green Jobs 
Workforce Academy was launched in August 
2021. The Academy will make it easier for 
people from a wide range of backgrounds 
to launch a green career, and to access 
240Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
appropriate training. The Academy will support 
delivery of a skills guarantee for workers in 
carbon-intensive sectors.
Wales 
Since its launch in 2010 the £30+ million 
BEACON, a collaboration led by Aberystwyth 
University, working with Bangor and Swansea 
Universities and the University of South Wales, 
has built up a strong skill base in the bio 
business sector by providing collaborative 
R&D support for Welsh businesses30. 
BEACON has worked successfully with 
hundreds of companies, enabling them to 
develop and trial ideas on an industrial scale, 
and to get their products and services closer 
to market. Products include bio plastics, food 
additives, building materials and fuel.
241Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Reforming the skills system  23. Second, our £65 million Development 
Fund pilots in 2021-2022 will support work 
20. We are driving forward reforms to put 
to identify employers’ skills needs, design 
employers at the heart of the skills system and 
provision to respond, and build the capacity 
ensure colleges are responsive to the needs 
of local further education providers to deliver. 
of local economies. As demand for green skills 
Where local areas identify a skills need, for 
continue to grow across the UK, employers in 
example increasing the number of trained 
the green economy must prioritise investment 
retrofitters, providers could use this funding 
in the retraining and upskilling of their 
to purchase equipment, train their staff, bring 
workforce, and actively take the opportunity 
in industry expertise to provide training, or 
to engage with education providers to shape 
deliver new provision. The majority of the 
local provision. 
18 pilots announced in July 2021 include a 
project focused on green skills, covering areas 
21. Central to our strategic reforms are the 
including decarbonisation, renewable energy, 
plans set out in the Skills for Jobs White 
and electric vehicles.
Paper, which will enable local employers to set 
out their green skills needs to drive provision in 
24. Alongside this. we want people to get 
local colleges. The programme is made up of 
the advanced technical and higher technical 
two parts: local skills improvement plans and 
skills they need to get good jobs. Colleges’ 
the Development Fund.
place at the centre of their local communities 
and economies means that they are key to 
22. First, the Trailblazers for local skills 
unlocking opportunities across the country 
improvement plans, led by employer 
and to building back better. We are, therefore, 
representative bodies will identify and 
reforming the adult skills funding and 
articulate unmet and future local skills needs 
accountability system for further education 
and work with further education providers 
colleges and other training providers in a way 
to adapt their technical training offer so that 
that will help improve our skills provision. 
it becomes more responsive to employers’ 
We are consulting on a range of proposals 
needs. Through the Skills and Post-16 
to make sure colleges are better supported 
Education Bill, we are legislating to put the 
to focus on helping their students into good 
employer leadership of these plans on a 
jobs; reduce the complexity of funding so 
statutory footing and ensure they have regard 
that colleges can focus on their core role of 
to skills needed to help deliver on our net zero 
education and training; and define clearer 
target, adaptation to climate change, and 
roles and responsibilities for the key players 
other environmental goals. 
in the system. This means that, for the first 
time, we will be able to reflect the value that 
relevant courses deliver to the taxpayer in the 
funding rate colleges receive for putting on 
courses. This will encourage providers to put 
on courses in subjects where there is strong 
demand from employers. We will hold colleges 
to account for delivering good outcomes, and 
are consulting on proposals to introduce new 
Accountability Agreements setting out national 
priorities against which we expect colleges 
to deliver, for example enabling students to 
access opportunities in the green economy. 
242Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
25. Supporting the transition through the  Ramping up support for workers in 
skills system will require teachers in the  high carbon sectors to transition to 
further education sector to have a strong 
green jobs
understanding of sustainability. To deliver this, 
we have worked with employers to develop  26. Over 80% of the workforce of 2030 is 
a refreshed apprenticeship standard for  already in work today31, as such meeting 
further education teaching (Level 5 Learning  our ambitious targets for climate action in 
and Skills Teacher), which came into effect  the next decade, and reaching net zero by 
in September 2021. For the first time, all  2050, will require government and industry 
further education teachers training via an  to work together to ensure workers in high-
apprenticeship will be required to integrate  carbon sectors can retrain and upskill as 
sustainability into their teaching, including  they move into jobs in the green economy. 
through modelling sustainable practices and  Much of this will take place in industry (see 
promoting sustainable development principles  the case study below) and we will support 
in relation to their subject specialism. Early  this through our targeted programmes for 
estimates from the Trailblazer Group suggest  industries and workers.
around 1,500 teachers each year could train 
using this apprenticeship standard. This 
standard will soon be incorporated into all 
future further education teaching qualifications, 
so that all teachers across all subject areas will 
be able to embed and promote sustainability 
in their teaching.
Case study: Industry action on reskilling for the transition
Centrica
Centrica have announced plans to hire 3,500 Smart Energy Apprentices 
by 2030, with the first 1,000 apprentices recruited by the end of 2022. 
Apprentices joining Centrica receive technical skills training and knowledge 
for the job at the company’s academies in Dartford, Hamilton, Leicester, 
and Thatcham. Many have taken up the opportunity to upskill at Centrica to 
become domestic electrical installers, with skills in Electric Vehicle charging 
point installation, or to achieve gas boiler service and repair capability. 
Upskilling training for domestic electrical installers lasts 20 weeks and is 
offered after Smart Energy Engineers have finished their apprenticeship. The 
gas boiler service and repair programme also takes place after completing 
the Smart Energy Apprenticeships, and is split over two years. Every year, 
Centrica’s academies train and assess 5,000 engineers to keep all British 
Gas engineers compliant with their specific roles’ regulatory and industry 
requirements.
243Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
27. In key sectors, we will ramp up our  qualifications linked to green sectors such 
support to develop UK supply chains and  as Agriculture, Building and Construction, 
enable workers to access green jobs. This  Engineering, Environmental Conservation, 
will include working with industry on a Heat  Horticulture and Forestry and Science. An 
Network Skills Programme to increase the  estimated 11 million adults over the age of 24 
capacity and capability of the UK supply chain  in England are eligible for the Free Courses for 
to support the sector to reach its growth  Jobs offer. We will continue working closely 
potential. Our Public Sector Low Carbon Skills  with employers to understand where the offer 
Fund will enable public sector organisations  could be extended further to enable more 
to acquire expert skills in order to unlock  adults to access qualifications to give them 
decarbonisation projects. Alongside this, we  skills needed for the net zero transition.
will work with industry to support training 
29. This will be underpinned by the Lifelong 
and new routes of entry to help boost heat 
Loan Entitlement (LLE) from 2025, which will 
pump installer numbers and other areas of 
provide individuals with a loan entitlement 
skills shortage to support the decarbonisation 
equivalent to up to four years of post-18 
of buildings. We will also support the 
education to use over their lifetime. As part 
development of new green skills for hydrogen, 
of the pathway towards the LLE, we will 
CCUS and industrial decarbonisation to 
trial short course provision at Levels 4-6 to 
ensure the UK workforce is ready to deploy 
support in-work adults to upskill and retrain, 
low carbon technologies. Our funding for the 
enabling learners to flexibly build towards a 
Aberdeen Energy Transition Zone will position 
full qualification in subjects crucial for net zero 
the region as an exemplar for low carbon 
including STEM and digital innovation.
development, supporting the transition of 
existing oil and gas skills to renewable energy  30. Through the NSF we are also delivering 
sectors. We also will continue to support the  an Emerging Skills Project in electrification and 
forestry sector to improve its training and  battery technology, which commenced in June 
career services. 2021.Alongside this, our NSF funded In-Work 
Skills Pilot, launched in September 2021, will 
28. Through the Lifetime Skills Guarantee, 
seek to respond to immediate skills shortages 
we are supporting workers to gain the skills 
required for net zero, stimulate demand for 
they need to transition to the green economy, 
short course provision at levels 4-5 across 
including through targeted support for 
STEM sectors, and boost worker’s career 
retraining. As part of this, through the National 
and progression opportunities in key green 
Skills Fund (NSF) investment we are delivering 
sectors, such as electrification in the auto 
Skills Bootcamps, which are short, flexible 
industry and low carbon engineering. 
courses covering digital, technical and green 
skills. Green Skills Bootcamps are available in 
areas such as housing retrofit, solar, nuclear 
energy and vehicle electrification. Overall, we 
expect there will be approximately 16,000 
Skills Bootcamp places available across the 
country in financial year 2021-22. We will 
undertake robust evaluation of this exciting 
training model to explore potential future 
plans. In addition, our Free Courses for Jobs 
offer has, since April 2021, been supporting 
adults that do not have a qualification at 
Level 332 or higher to access over 400 Level 
3 courses for free. The offer currently includes 
244Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
31. Given the pace and the scale of the  34. Alongside this, we will continue to work 
transformation, we are considering how  with green employers to raise awareness 
government can work more closely with  of the opportunities in the green economy 
sectors in the future to support them in the  through an integrated careers information, 
green transition, and identifying where we can  advice and guidance offer through schools, 
adapt and enhance our support for people  colleges, universities, and employers to raise 
at risk of redundancy to support a transition  awareness of different career pathways in low 
to green jobs. This builds upon our existing  carbon sectors. 
work coach interventions and targeted 
35. To further break down perceived barriers 
provision including Sector-based Work 
to working in the energy sector, boost diversity 
Academy Programmes (SWAPs), traineeships, 
and increase STEM skills, our Build Back 
apprenticeships and other skills provision 
Better campaigns will seek to inspire people 
which are ensuring jobseekers can develop 
from all walks of life to work in the green 
the right skills to move into green jobs.
economy, and raise awareness of green 
Working with business to support  education, training, and careers. 
people from all backgrounds to have a 
36. The UK’s joint presidency of COP26 
green career brings a unique opportunity to showcase 
green careers to a new generation of children 
32. We support the Green Jobs Taskforce’s 
and young people. We are capitalising on 
recommendation that industry should prioritise 
this by working with industry to launch the 
ensuring that people from all backgrounds 
Faces of The Energy Transition campaign 
can work in green jobs, building on existing 
to showcase the inspiring people, projects 
good practice and capitalising on the unique 
and organisations working to achieve the 
opportunity of young people’s interest in 
clean energy transition, and supporting green 
climate change and the environment. A 
careers events at COP26 in Glasgow.
more diverse workforce will aid the transition 
by expanding the talent pool, encouraging  Building a foundation for future 
new ways of thinking, enhancing innovation, 
green careers
and boosting profitability and productivity 
across the economy.33 37. Schools and colleges will play a vital role 
delivering high-quality education and training 
33. To drive this important work forward we 
to equip young people with the knowledge 
will continue to encourage industry to ensure 
and skills required for the green economy. This 
there is equal opportunity for all to work in 
will help to grow the pipeline of skilled workers 
the green economy, building on our support 
needed to help deliver the net zero transition. 
for industry initiatives such as the POWERful 
Women campaign and commitment under  38. The science, geography and citizenship 
the ‘Equal by 30 Campaign’ to close the  programmes in the National Curriculum at 
pay gap, improve female representation in  both primary (KS1-2) and secondary (KS3-4) 
senior roles and opportunity for women in  cover key content which supports knowledge 
the global clean energy sector by 2030.  and understanding of sustainability and 
Through the cross-cutting delivery group we  climate change. An environmental science 
will explore what actions can be taken across  A Level was introduced in 2017. Equipping 
industry to improve diversity in the green  students with secure knowledge and skills in 
economy, including improving data collection  STEM and other key subjects will be critical 
and transparency. in supporting them to progress to skilled jobs 
in the green economy. We are, therefore, 
supporting teachers to deliver high-quality 
245Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
teaching in these subjects by creating a  41. To ensure this system reflects the needs 
world-class teacher development system that  of the green economy, the Institute for 
builds from initial teacher training through to  Apprenticeships and Technical Education 
early career support, specialisation and onto  (IfATE) has convened a Green Apprenticeships 
school leadership. Our vision is that a golden  Advisory Panel (GAAP) to work with 
thread of training, support and professional  employers to align apprenticeships to net 
development - informed by high-quality  zero objectives. Work is underway to map 
evidence - will run through each phase of  existing apprenticeship standards against 
a teacher’s career. We are also funding  green occupations and identify opportunities 
several initiatives to support subject-specific  to create new standards in areas including 
professional development in STEM subjects  retrofit, agri-tech and renewable energy 
across all key stages. We are working with  and the GAAP has endorsed existing 
Oak National Academy to give teachers  apprenticeships which support green career 
access to high-quality curriculum resources to  pathways. We have already seen positive 
support their teaching, including in subjects  engagement in the energy sector with over 
that cover sustainability and climate change.  1,000 apprenticeship starts in Wind Turbine 
We are also working with industry, through  Maintenance and Operations Engineering 
programmes such as Tomorrow’s Engineers  Technician standards in 2019/20. The GAAP 
Code, to showcase the diversity of roles  will build on this list into 2022, in line with the 
and people that make up the STEM sector,  Ten Point Plan and the findings of the Green 
encouraging more young people from different  Jobs Taskforce. The work of the GAAP will 
backgrounds to choose a career in the sector. also support other key post-16 programmes 
that are underpinned by the same standards 
39. We will build on this by bringing 
as apprenticeships (such as T levels and 
forward a strategy which will set out how 
higher technical qualifications) to align with the 
our children’s services, education and skills 
needs of the green economy.
systems will support the UK to meet its net 
zero target, become more resilient to climate  42. In 2021, we introduced the first 
change and improve biodiversity. This will  occupational traineeships, in collaboration 
include a focus on ensuring excellence in  with sector bodies, to provide a clear, planned 
education for a changing world, which will  transition to an apprenticeship at Level 2-3 
prepare children and young people with the  for young people aged 16-24. Going forward, 
knowledge and skills they need to contribute  we will consider the potential to develop and 
to the green economy. introduce other occupational traineeships, 
including in priority and green sectors 
40. At post-16 level, we will continue to 
to ensure that young people secure the 
build on our apprenticeship reforms, set out 
jobs of the future.
in the Skills for Jobs White Paper, to align 
the majority of post-16 technical education  43. We are continuing to roll out T Levels that 
and training with employer-led standards by  support green careers, providing high quality 
2030. A strengthened system of employer-led  technical qualifications as an alternative to A 
standards, underpinning apprenticeships,  Levels which are underpinned by the same 
T-levels and new higher technical qualifications  employer-led approach as apprenticeships. 
will ensure employers, including in low carbon  The building services engineering for 
sectors, have a central role in designing and  construction T Level, launched in September 
developing qualifications and training.  2021, will cover housing retrofit and heat 
pump installation. From September 2022, 
new T Levels will be available in Engineering, 
Manufacturing, Processing and Control, with 
246Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Agriculture, Land Management and Production  Next steps
available by September 2023. IfATE is 
46. The policies set out in this chapter 
exploring the suitability of potential future T 
represent a first step in addressing the 
Levels and occupational specialisms, focusing 
challenges identified by the Green Jobs 
on areas to support green skills.
Taskforce. We will progress further work 
44. IfATE has introduced an approval process  through the cross-cutting delivery group, 
for Higher Technical Qualifications (HTQs) at  maintaining the momentum generated by the 
Levels 4 and 5. HTQs will be rolled out for  Taskforce to drive action across the green 
teaching from September 2022, covering  skills agenda. Working alongside industry, 
eleven occupational routes - including  we will continue to build the evidence on the 
qualifications in digital, construction and  skills gaps which could hamper the net zero 
engineering – coming on stream up to 2025.  transition if left unaddressed, assess how far 
Future roll-out will continue supporting the  existing interventions are on course to address 
development of skills for the transition to net  those skills gaps, and where appropriate 
zero as a key government priority. The goal is  identify further opportunities to flex key 
to grow the number of learners undertaking  skills programmes to support green sectors 
high-quality level 4 and 5 qualifications to  and occupations.
meet skills needs at this level. Earlier this year, 
we launched an £18 million higher technical 
education provider growth fund to allow 
investment in new equipment that will support 
providers to expand technical studies, and 
boost local employer links. Our growth fund is 
supporting 15 universities and 87 FE colleges 
to teach HTQs from next year.
45. Finally, our network of Institutes of 
Technology (IoTs) across England are utilising 
their state-of-the-art facilities to offer training 
in green skills. This includes the East London 
IoT which offers training in green and zero 
carbon energy production, and the Greater 
Birmingham and Solihull IoT which focuses 
on sustainable engineering. The network is 
supporting increased participation from under-
represented groups, including women, helping 
to grow the pipeline of individuals with STEM 
skills needed for green jobs. We are investing 
£120 million in the second wave of IoTs, to be 
up and running by 2022. 
247Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
4iv. Embedding Net Zero 
in Government
Climate considerations underpinning policy across Government
Our Key Commitments
•  Require the government to reflect environmental issues in national policy making 
through consideration of five environmental principles.
•  Ensure that decisions taken on government spending are informed by their impact 
on meeting net zero.
•  New measures to reduce emissions from Government’s £292 billion procurement 
spending – and ensure suppliers have plans for achieving net zero on major 
qualifying public contracts.
•  Continue to fund the Public Sector Decarbonisation Scheme at £475 million per 
year to drive ambitious emissions reductions in schools, hospitals, and other public 
buildings, whilst taking further action on skills, reporting, and targets.
•  Publish an annual progress update against a set of key indicators for achieving 
our climate goals.
•  Expand climate change training to ensure the Civil Service has the skills and people 
it needs to deliver net zero.
The challenge
1. Net zero is a complex and transformative 
undertaking for the UK. The way the 
government operates must rise to meet this 
challenge. This means reducing the public 
sector’s own carbon footprint – but also 
changing how we are organised and how 
we take decisions. Building on our recent 
historic progress, we are now going further 
to ensure the whole government meets the 
challenge of net zero.
248Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Our goal
2. Since setting the net zero target, a huge  3. These efforts put climate change at the 
effort has taken place across government  heart of our decision-making and have led 
to ensure we are set up in the right way  to the ambitious announcements set out 
to deliver on our climate ambitions. We  in recent years: the Prime Minister’s Ten 
have gone further than ever before to put  Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution, 
the climate at the heart of our decision- dedicated strategies for key sectors of the 
making. This includes: economy, and this Net Zero Strategy; and set 
us up to deliver on those commitments. 
•  Establishing two Cabinet Committees 
dedicated to climate change; 4. Our goal is to go even further to embed net 
zero across government activity. This will mean 
•  Announcing as part of the Integrated 
that government takes net zero into account 
Review of Security, Defence, Development 
when taking decisions, public sector buildings 
and Foreign Policy that tackling 
will emit less carbon, our procurement 
climate change and biodiversity loss 
decisions will lead to greener supply chains, 
will be the Government‘s number one 
and civil servants across government will have 
international priority;
the skills they need to deliver this mission.
•  Using the Environment Bill to require 
the government to reflect environmental  5. To do this we must understand the 
considerations in national policy  interactions between climate change and 
making through consideration of five  other UK priorities. The measures set out in 
environmental principles; this chapter are crucial for ensuring that the 
UK takes a whole system approach to tackling 
•  Taking new approaches to embed net zero 
climate change: 
in spending decisions;
•  Establishing the No.10 Delivery Unit to  •  Multiple forums – including Cabinet 
ensure the government maintains a sharp  Committees – that bring together different 
focus on delivering the country’s key  perspectives on net zero and its interaction 
priorities. One of the four priorities for this  with other priorities;
Unit is the delivery of net zero; and,
•  Delivering climate skills and training across 
•  Setting out in collaboration with key net  the Civil Service – not just to civil servants 
zero delivery departments, a high level  working directly on climate issues;
strategy for delivering on the UK’s net 
•  Close working relationships with 
zero commitments through the BEIS 
local government and the Devolved 
Outcome Delivery Plan 2021-2022. This 
Administrations; and,
plan identified key programmes critical to 
•  Embedding net zero in a wider range of 
delivery and set out an evaluation plan to 
decision-making levers.
monitor and assess progress.
249Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Net zero in government decision-making
6. In the last two years the Government has  Consistency of approach 
made commitments to strengthen governance 
across the UK
around net zero. Two Cabinet committees 
were established in 2020 to rationalise climate  8. To reach net zero we must take a UK-
governance and put net zero at the heart of  wide approach. The UK Government and the 
government decision-making. This is driven  Devolved Administrations are committed to 
by the Prime Minister, who chairs the Climate  working together to deliver coordinated policy 
Action Strategy Committee (CAS). This  action to meet respective emissions reduction 
Committee considers matters relating to the  targets across the UK. Combined, Scotland, 
delivery of the UK’s domestic and international  Wales and Northern Ireland produced 22% 
climate strategy. In addition, the Climate  of UK emissions in 2019,34 and accounted 
Action Implementation Committee (CAI) which  for 16% of the UK’s population, 13% of 
is chaired by the COP President Designate. It  economic activity35 and nearly half of the UK’s 
considers the delivery of COP 26, net zero and  land area (46%).36 Powers and policies to 
building the UK’s resilience to climate impacts.  deliver ambitious emissions reductions in the 
These committees’ ability to scrutinise  Devolved Administrations Scotland, Wales and 
progress and take whole system decisions  Northern Ireland are partly reserved to the UK 
will be strengthened by the new measures  Government and partly devolved.
described in this chapter.
9. The UK Government and the Devolved 
7. These committees are supported by  Administrations have established governance 
well-established and robust governance at  arrangements to ensure a joined-up and 
official level. This includes a cross-government  collaborative approach to climate change. 
Director General group that was established  At the bimonthly Net Zero, Energy and 
in 2019 to ensure a whole-of-government  Climate Change Inter-Ministerial Group, UK 
approach to climate policy, with oversight  Government ministers meet with Devolved 
at the most senior levels. Chaired by the  Administration counterparts to discuss 
BEIS Director General for Net Zero and  emerging policies that will contribute to 
International, this group brings together  delivery of net zero targets across the UK, 
officials from across government, creating  such as delivering a UK-wide Emissions 
a whole system perspective, to support the  Trading Scheme, and the level of the sixth 
delivery of significant climate announcements,  carbon budget which was set in law in 
including those contained in this Strategy. June 2021. The Group is supported by the 
official-level Net Zero Nations Board on 
alternate months.
250Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Embedding net zero in  12. The duty to consider these principles 
government decisions should be applied in the early stages of policy 
development and considered throughout. 
10. Climate change is a major issue for  In doing so, the extent to which a policy 
all governments in the 21st century. Our  will contribute to climate change should 
mission to reduce emissions, seize economic  be considered alongside other impacts of 
opportunities, and adapt to extreme weather  the policy on the environment. Net zero will 
events will affect many more of the decisions  therefore be facilitated by the principles where 
that the Government takes than it would have  they are applied to relevant decisions.
done in previous decades. To that end, it is 
13. The integration principle will create 
essential that we put in place new levers to 
a prompt for policy makers to embed 
ensure that all the Government’s decisions 
environmental protection in policy making, 
adequately take climate change into account. 
triggering consideration of the government’s 
This Strategy sets out key measures we will 
priorities for environmental protection (such as 
take to ensure a climate-focus on key future 
net zero) and whether these priorities can be 
decisions made by the government.
supported through the new policy. The polluter 
11. We are using the Environment Bill  pays and prevention principles could also 
to require the government to reflect  help to contribute to net zero targets, through 
environmental issues such as climate  encouraging policies that reduce carbon 
change in national policy-making through  emissions and prevent adverse impacts on 
consideration of five environmental principles:  climate where possible. These principles will 
ensure the environment is at the heart of 
•  The integration principle is the principle 
policymaking across government.
which states that policy-makers 
should look for opportunities to embed  14. Ensuring spending decisions contribute 
environmental protection in other  to net zero is a major priority for HM Treasury. 
fields of policy that have impacts on  The Green Book already mandates the 
the environment. consideration of climate and environmental 
•  The prevention principle means that  impacts in spending. It has been updated 
government policy should aim to prevent,  so that policies must be developed and 
reduce or mitigate harm. assessed against how well they deliver on 
the Government’s long-term policy aims 
•  The rectification at source principle 
such as net zero.
means that if damage to the environment 
cannot be prevented it should be  15. Spending reviews are critical moments 
tackled at its origin. for the Government to look strategically at 
•  The polluter pays principle is the principle  the country’s priorities and make spending 
that those who cause pollution or damage  decisions based on these. At Spending 
to the environment should be responsible  Review 2020 (SR20), guidance required 
for mitigation or compensation. departments to state the greenhouse gas 
emissions of bids, and their impact on meeting 
•  The precautionary principle states that 
Carbon Budgets and net zero. Allocations 
where there are threats of serious or 
to departments were informed by this 
irreversible environmental damage, 
information, and £12 billion was committed 
a lack of scientific certainty shall not 
to green measures. We have reviewed the 
be used as a reason for postponing 
learning from this exercise to further embed 
cost-effective measures to prevent 
climate change in spending decisions in the 
environmental degradation.
next spending review and in the long term.
251Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
16. In September 2021, the Government  Supporting UK businesses
published updated guidance on how impacts 
20. We are considering net zero through our 
on greenhouse gas emissions should be 
support to business too across government 
measured in policy decisions. As a result, 
activity. Innovate UK is the UK’s Innovation 
departments must place a significantly higher 
Agency, it drives productivity and economic 
value on emissions in determining policy, as 
growth by supporting UK businesses to 
the values now fully reflect the UK’s increased 
commercialise new ideas and address the big 
ambitions on climate. This complements wider 
societal challenges facing the UK today. 
considerations on natural capital impacts in 
policy decisions – and represents a significant 
21. As the UK moves to a net zero economy, 
step forward in incorporating environmental 
Innovate UK is supporting businesses to 
impacts into policy development.
exploit new ideas, develop supply chains, and 
thrive in growing global markets. Last year 
17. As set out in the Green Investment 
Innovate UK committed to spend £276 million 
chapter, we have also taken steps to ensure 
with UK businesses to tackle net zero.
net zero is embedded in government funding 
and regulation of the financial system. Arm’s-
Net zero in the work of regulators
length bodies, such as the British Business 
Bank, have adopted net zero as a core  22. Many of the UK’s regulators will play a 
objective. This will expand the flow of finance  role in facilitating delivery of the infrastructure, 
to those innovative firms that will help us  technologies and activities that will deliver 
reduce our energy consumption and mitigate  the net zero transition. Several examples are 
the impacts of climate change. set out in the sector focused chapters in this 
strategy. The government is also considering 
18. This builds on important announcements 
whether and how the functions of those 
in the 2021 Budget, particularly the new 
regulators most important to the transition can 
UK Infrastructure Bank that will use its £22 
be strengthened.
billion of financial capacity to crowd-in private 
investment to support economic growth,  23. For example, to provide strategic 
accelerate our progress to net zero, and help  guidance to Ofgem on the government’s 
level up the UK. One of the Bank’s objectives  energy policy, the Energy White Paper 
is to help the UK transition to net zero  committed the government to consulting 
emissions by 2050. on an energy sector strategy and policy 
statement (SPS) for Ofgem during 2021. The 
19. We will make sure that the reformed 
SPS will set out the strategic priorities and 
planning system supports our efforts to 
policy outcomes of the government’s energy 
combat climate change and help bring 
policy, with net zero as the driving theme. 
greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 
This will impose a legal obligation on Ofgem 
2050. For example, as part of our programme 
to have regard to the strategic priorities and 
of planning reform we intend to review the 
policy outcomes when exercising its regulatory 
National Planning Policy Framework to make 
functions. To provide clear legal accountability, 
sure it contributes to climate change mitigation 
Ofgem will be required to report on how it 
and adaptation as fully as possible.
intends to implement the SPS at the outset, 
and then report annually on its performance 
and its plans for the coming year. 
252Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
24. The Competition and Markets Authority  achieving net zero, promoting coherence, and 
(CMA) is reviewing how the UK can better  supporting a transparent strategic framework; 
use the tools available under competition and  and the exploring of the merits of a cross-
consumer law to achieve net zero and our  sector-strategic Policy Statement to provide 
sustainability goals. The CMA will provide this  clarity on government’s overarching strategic 
advice in early 2022. This follows recent CMA  vision for the regulated sectors.
work on misleading environmental claims, 
26. In addition, the Government has recently 
its market study into electric vehicles and its 
consulted on proposals for reforming the UK’s 
publication of information to businesses on 
regulatory framework. When the consultation 
sustainability agreements.
response is published, it will include the 
25. The National Infrastructure Strategy  Government’s decisions on how regulators 
committed to taking a long-term approach to  can be encouraged to consider themes 
investment for the benefit of both investors  such as competition, innovation and net zero 
and consumers, responding to the findings  in their regulatory activities. For example, 
of the National Infrastructure Commission’s  the consultation sought views on whether 
report on the future of economic regulation  regulators might be granted more flexibility 
in key infrastructure. The government also  by government to choose how they intervene 
committed to publishing an overarching  in their sectors, to allow more agile, smarter 
policy paper in 2021. The policy paper will  regulation. The Government would like to 
set out next steps on key issues including:  see a consistent approach taken across the 
the consideration of duties in the round to  various regulated sectors and will set out more 
ensure they reflect new challenges such as  thinking on this in due course.
Demonstrating progress towards net zero
Increasing transparency of progress 29. It is critical for public and industry 
confidence that the UK has a clear plan 
27. Every year the government 
for achieving net zero – and that we are 
comprehensively reports the UK’s historic 
transparent about how this plan progresses 
emissions since 1990 and publishes 
and changes over time. The Journey to Net 
projections of future emissions.37 The UK’s 
Zero chapter of this Strategy report set out 
‘Energy and Emissions Projections’ is a world-
a delivery pathway: an indicative trajectory 
leading approach to projecting the UK’s annual 
of emissions reductions based on potential 
emissions, by sector, according to United 
in each sector of the economy, which 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
keeps us on track to meet the sixth carbon 
Change guidelines.
budget ending in 2037. Sector chapters set 
out policies and proposals in line with this 
28. We are now going further to clearly 
indicative pathway to ensure we are on track 
demonstrate the tangible milestones that the 
for net zero. While it is impossible to predict 
UK will have to reach to achieve net zero, and 
every path to net zero, this pathway sets out 
to communicate and invite scrutiny on this 
the decisive action we know is needed and 
progress to the public.
acts as the best plan we have to measure 
progress against.
253Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
30. We are therefore committing to provide  •  Commentary on contextual changes that 
a public update every year on progress  might affect the exact pathway to meeting 
in the previous year against the delivery  decarbonisation commitments; and,
pathway to net zero set out in this Strategy. 
•  A summary of key areas of progress made 
This will include:
against this pathway the policies and 
proposals in this strategy.
•  An update on progress against the targets 
and ambitions set out in this Strategy (see 
Table A), building on this list over time 
to incorporate additional Government 
targets and wider non-Government 
indicators of progress; 
The following targets and ambitions will form part of the Government’s annual update on 
progress towards net zero: 
Power By 2035 all our electricity will come from low carbon sources subject to 
security of supply.
40GW of offshore wind by 2030, including 1GW floating wind.
Industry Ambition to deliver 6 MtCO  per year of industrial CCUS by 2030, and 9 
2
MtCO  by 2035.
2
Fuel supply and hydrogen 5GW of low carbon hydrogen production capacity by 2030.
Achieve a final decision on whether to enable blending up to 20% 
hydrogen by volume into the Great Britain gas network by 2023, subject to 
successful completion of safety trials.
The offshore oil and gas sector to have an absolute reduction in 
production emissions of 10% by 2025, 25% by 2027, and 50% by 2030 
on the pathway to net zero by 2050.38
Heat and buildings Aim to reduce direct emissions from public sector buildings by 75% by 
2037 compared to 2017.
Achieve a minimum market capacity of 600,000 heat pumps per year by 
2028.
As many homes to reach EPC Band C as possible by 2035, where 
practical, cost effective, and affordable.
As many fuel poor homes as reasonably practicable to Band C by 2030.
254Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Transport Double cycling from 2013 to 2025.39
Increase walking activity by 2025.40
Deliver 4,000 new zero emission buses and the infrastructure needed to 
support them.
25% of the government car fleet ultra low emission by December 2022 
and 100% of the government car and van fleet zero emission by 2027.
100% of new cars and vans sold are zero emission by 2035.
100% of new HGV sold are zero emission.
100% of new buses/coaches sold are zero emission.
Maximise GHG savings from low carbon fuel use in transport by increasing 
the Renewable Transport Fuel Obligation main obligation from 9.6% in 
2021 to 14.6% in 2032.
Natural resources, waste, and  Restore at least 35,000 ha of peatlands in England by 2025 and 
F-gases approximately 280,000 hectares of peat in England by 2050.
Increase tree planting rates from 13,660 hectares across the UK in 2020 
to 30,000 hectares each year by the end of this Parliament.
Deliver the UN Sustainable Development Goal 12.3 to halve food waste by 
2030.
Explore policies to work towards the near elimination of biodegradable 
municipal waste to landfill by 2028.
Meet the Kigali Amendment target of reducing HFC consumption by 85% 
by 2036, as well as the F-gas Regulation’s target of a 79% reduction by 
2030.
Greenhouse gas removals At least 5 MtCO /yr of engineered removals by 2030.
2
31. We will publish an updated  of common issues and inter-dependencies 
Net Zero Strategy when we set the  across all programmes delivering net zero. 
next Carbon Budget. This will enable them to make informed, timely 
decisions to enable us to stay on track to 
Strengthening delivery oversight of 
meeting net zero. 
net zero projects and programmes
33. This complements work led by the 
32. Significant recent steps have been taken  Infrastructure and Projects Authority (IPA). 
to oversee the delivery of key projects and  The IPA is the government’s centre of 
programmes that will contribute to net zero.  expertise for infrastructure and major projects, 
This year, the Prime Minister established the  supporting the successful delivery of all types 
No. 10 Delivery Unit to ensure the government  of major projects. The IPA sits at the heart of 
maintains a sharp focus on delivering the  government, reporting to the Cabinet Office 
country’s key priorities. One of the four  and HM Treasury. The Project Outcome Profile 
priorities for this Unit is the delivery of net zero.  Tool launched in July 2021, ensures that 
BEIS in parallel has developed a new model  projects and programmes are clearly linked 
for monitoring net zero delivery and reporting  to government priorities (such as net zero) 
on programme and project-level risks –  from the outset and support their delivery. Its 
ensuring decision makers get early visibility  assurance toolkit has recently been updated 
255Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
to include key tests and key questions on  Infrastructure Performance: Roadmap to 
the environment, climate adaptation, and  2030, it is driving the use of whole life carbon 
net zero, in the Government’s gateway  reporting to reduce embodied carbon in the 
process. Through the IPA’s Transforming  built environment. 
Government leading by example
Decarbonising the public sector 38. Building on the success of the Public 
Sector Decarbonisation Scheme, we will 
34. Government and the wider public sector 
continue and extend the scheme to ensure 
will lead by example during the transition to 
that public sector bodies have access to 
net zero. As well as ensuring that net zero 
finance to continue decarbonising their 
is reflected in our structures and practices, 
estates , investing a further £1425 million over 
we will continue to take ambitious action to 
2022/23 to 2024/25.
reduce public sector emissions, showing 
leadership to the wider economy, and making  High standards with transparency
a direct contribution to reaching net zero.
39. Public sector organisations should 
35. Direct emissions from public sector  be taking steps to achieve net zero now 
buildings account for around 2% of total UK  should report their progress so they can be 
emissions, and the public sector has reduced  held accountable and as publicly funded 
its emissions by around 40% since 1990.41 organisations. Government departments 
and their arm’s length bodies already set 
36. We intend to act in three areas to 
and report against targets to reduce their 
ensure we are on track to achieve net zero: 
greenhouse gas emissions in Greening 
investment, transparency, and capacity and 
Government Commitments. The updated 
capability, and in doing so will aim to reduce 
Greening Government Commitments 
direct emissions from public sector buildings 
framework for 2021-25 will ensure the public 
by 75% against a 2017 baseline, by the end of 
estate continues to reduce its environmental 
Carbon Budget 6.
footprint, align with commitments in our 25 
Year Environment Plan and be consistent with 
Investment
a trajectory to achieving net zero greenhouse 
37. Reducing direct emissions from public  gas emissions by 2050.
sector buildings requires investment in 
40. All public sector bodies should now 
measures to reduce fossil fuel use, including 
be monitoring their energy use and have 
the installation of low carbon heating 
targets to reduce emissions, particularly, to 
and complementary energy efficiency 
reduce the direct emissions for which they 
improvements, and the installation of low 
are responsible. To ensure we are on track 
carbon electricity systems such as rooftop 
to reach net zero, emissions from the public 
solar PV. The Public Sector Decarbonisation 
sector should be reported and monitored on a 
Scheme is providing over £1 billion in grants 
consistent and coherent basis. We will provide 
over 2020/21 and 2021/22 for public sector 
guidance to make clear the government’s 
bodies to fund heat decarbonisation and 
expectations in this regard. 
energy efficiency measures.
256Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
41. We will also legislate to enable us  45. The National Procurement Policy 
to require the reporting of public sector  Statement (NPPS), published in June 
emissions on a consistent and coherent  2021, sets out clear principles that 
basis if this is not done on a voluntary basis,  contracting authorities should be following 
and, if insufficient progress is made on  organisationally. Tackling climate change 
reducing emissions in the public sector, to  and achieving net zero is one of the key 
require that all public sector organisations  considerations established – this should then 
are working toward and reporting against  be woven through individual procurements 
a legally-binding target to reduce their  (for qualifying procurements).
greenhouse gas emissions.
46. The Procurement Policy Note on Taking 
Capacity and capability account of carbon reduction plans in the 
procurement of major government contracts 
42. Reducing emissions requires specialist 
comes into effect from Autumn 2021. This 
skills and expertise, as well as funding. Action 
will impact over £50 billion of procurement 
at an unprecedented scale is required to 
spend. For qualifying contracts, it requires 
reduce emissions from public sector estates 
suppliers who are bidding on central 
in line with net zero, and organisations need 
government contracts (over £5 million p/a 
the right skills and structures to deliver on this. 
in value) to commit to achieving net zero by 
We will continue to work with partners across 
2050 and to detail their organisation’s UK 
government and the wider public sector to 
greenhouse gas emissions via the publication 
understand these needs, and provide the 
of a Carbon Reduction Plan. Failure to do 
support needed to address them. 
so may mean exclusion at supplier selection 
stage. Government will continue to take action 
Delivering net zero through public 
to reduce emissions, and this policy is an 
procurement
important step in ensuring our supply chain is 
sharing this ambition and taking similar steps 
43. The Government is determined to 
to reduce their emissions.
leverage public procurement to help achieve 
net zero. We will use our buying power to 
47. The Social Value Model requires 
drive decarbonisation and to create the policy 
government to expressly evaluate 
tools and training to enable public procurers to 
environmental, social and economic 
grasp this opportunity.
benefits, with these factors comprising a 
minimum of 10% of the evaluation score for 
44. Clearly establishing the strategic 
qualifying procurements.42
importance of net zero at project design stage, 
as described above, will mean that it is easier 
48. Throughout the development of these 
to draw through this ‘golden thread’ when 
policy measures, government has been 
reaching procurement stage. The government 
working with departments, suppliers and 
has recently announced three distinct new 
industry bodies to raise awareness of how 
policies that can all help public procurers fully 
environmental considerations can be brought 
embed net zero into their work. These all kick 
into the commercial process, and to build 
in at different stages of the commercial cycle, 
capability in understanding and assessing 
complementing each other in terms of their 
suppliers’ commitments. Several thousand 
scope and their reach.
buyers across government have completed 
Social Value training to develop the skills 
required to embed environmental policy 
outcomes and improve the sustainability of 
government contracts. We will continue to 
257Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
support the adoption and implementation  51. Our ambition is necessarily high – we are 
of environmental policy measures to deliver  changing the expectations on ourselves when 
the best commercial and environmental  it comes to utilising £292 billion of annual 
impact for the UK. procurement spend. In doing so we are also 
sending a clear signal to the market: data on 
49. These measures provide a platform for 
carbon impact, and immediate ambition to 
even stronger action. We have embarked 
reduce it, will be increasingly important in how 
upon a programme of major domestic 
we choose to do business with you.
procurement reform. This will enable us to 
use flexibilities provided by our departure from  Showing leadership on domestic and 
the EU to give even greater consideration 
international standards
to environmental factors in our decision 
making. One specific example is the proposal  52. The BSI, in its role as the UK’s national 
to break the subject matter of contract link  standards body, works across the sectors 
so that a company’s wider environmental  and topics that will be critical in achieving net 
proposals for the project can be factored into  zero, including greenhouse gas management, 
procurement decisions.  energy transition, biodiversity and sustainable 
finance. This work is helping the UK to take 
50. Domestically we also want to make it 
a global leadership role in net zero and 
easier for procurers to balance carbon against 
influence change on a global scale. To this 
cost. We want to underpin our net zero target 
effect BSI and the International Organization 
and COP26 ambitions by developing tools to 
Standardization have developed the London 
help us decarbonise the government’s supply 
Declaration – a commitment to actively 
chains and stimulate innovation and growth in 
consider climate change in the development 
the UK’s green economy. This work also takes 
and revision of all international standards and 
into account the Climate Change Committee’s 
to facilitate the involvement of civil society and 
(CCC) call for credible, quantifiable pathways 
those most vulnerable to climate change.
for sectoral decarbonisation. We will also 
explore the possibility of establishing a new  53. Through BSI’s international reach, the 
single unit for all sustainable procurement  UK will be able to help stakeholders reach 
policy within government to strengthen  consensus in international climate change 
performance, coordination, and oversight. standards and lead change globally in 
support of net zero.
Ensuring the right skills and talent in government
54. The government has established the  servants need to lead the UK’s future efforts to 
Government Skills and Curriculum Unit  decarbonise (see infographic below).
(GSCU) to oversee the delivery of better 
56. We are expanding the curriculum for civil 
training, knowledge and networks that the 
servants to include specific training on climate 
over 440,000 people working in the Civil 
change. We are also establishing climate 
Service will need today and in the future.
specific training within the Civil Service Fast 
55. Net zero will continue to be a priority  Stream curriculum.
for the government until 2050 and beyond. 
57. We have also embedded climate 
To that end, BEIS and GCSU are reviewing 
considerations in the Policy Profession 
the skills, training and networks that civil 
Standards, the competency framework that 
supports professional development for all civil 
258Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
servants developing policy. For the first time,  58. We are establishing a new climate focus 
this makes explicit that good policymaking  within the Civil Service Fast Stream Generalist 
requires an awareness of the potential for all  Scheme, which will focus on providing relevant 
policy areas to contribute or undermine our  skills and opportunities to some of the future 
climate goals.  leaders of the Civil Service.
Ambition for climate capabilities across Government
Technical specialists:
•
Specialist and world-leading 
expertise in commercial, project 
delivery, climate science, law, and 
innovation.
All leaders in Government:
•
Can challenge established truths 
about the interaction between climate 
and other policy priorities
•
Can communicate the whole system 
interactions between climate and all 
policy activity.
Everyone working on climate 
change:
•
Advanced understanding of UK 
and international climate policy 
framework
•
Able to understand, foresee, and 
manage the interaction between 
climate and other policy goals
Essential capabilities for every Civil 
Servant, this will vary by profession, 
e.g. everyone developing policy:
•
Understands the potential of policy 
areas to support or undermine UK 
climate objectives (for example 
net zero by 2050)
•
Understands where to seek further 
advice on these interactions
259Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
4v. Local Climate Action 
Supporting decarbonisation and regeneration in our local areas 
and communities
Key Commitments
•  Set clearer expectations on how central and local government interact in the 
delivery of net zero.
•  Build on existing engagement with local actors by establishing a Local Net Zero 
Forum to bring together national and local government senior officials on a regular 
basis to discuss policy and delivery options on net zero.
•  Continue the Local Net Zero Programme to support all local areas with their 
capability and capacity to meet net zero. This includes provisions to:
•  Continue the Local Net Zero Hubs (previously known as the local energy hubs) 
to support all areas of England to reach net zero, including those lacking 
capacity and capability, or those facing unique challenges. 
•  Promote best practice and support local authorities to develop net zero projects 
that can attract commercial investment. 
•  Increase knowledge sharing to demonstrate and share successful net zero 
system solutions.
260Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
The challenge
1. Devolved and local government play an 
essential role in meeting national net zero 
ambitions. Across the UK many places have 
already made great strides towards our net 
zero future, having set their own targets and 
strategies for meeting local net zero goals. 
Taking a place-based approach to net zero 
is also vital to ensuring that the opportunities 
from the transition support the government’s 
levelling up agenda.
2. The combination of devolved, local, and 
regional authorities’ legal powers, assets, 
4. Despite the excellent work already 
access to targeted funding, local knowledge, 
underway, we understand that there remain 
and relationships with stakeholders enables 
significant barriers to maximising place-
them to drive local progress towards net 
based delivery on net zero. We know that 
zero. Not only does local government drive 
some places are moving faster than others 
action directly, but it also plays a key role in 
and that places and communities will face 
communicating with, and inspiring action 
different challenges when meeting net zero 
by, local businesses, communities, and civil 
commitments and adapting to climate change.
society. Of all UK emissions, 82% are within 
the scope of influence of local authorities.43 5. There are significant regional variations in 
the level of emissions (see Figure 29 below) 
3. Local leaders are well placed to engage 
and some of the hardest hit local economies 
with all parts of their communities and to 
that face multiple development and growth 
understand local policy, political, social, and 
challenges are proportionally home to a 
economic nuances relevant to climate action. 
greater number of lower skilled workers. Many 
The government currently works with the Core 
of these areas are also where high-carbon 
Cities Group, for instance, which undertakes a 
industries are located.
range of activities to promote climate change 
adaptation, raise awareness and foster 
leadership in cities. Local government decides 
how best to serve communities and is best 
placed to integrate activity on the ground so 
that action on climate change also delivers 
wider benefits – for fuel poor households, for 
the local economy, for the environment and 
biodiversity, as well as the provision of green 
jobs and skills.
261Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Figure 29: Net emissions of carbon dioxide per capita by Local Authority 
(tonnes CO e per capita) in 2019
2
Source: ONS
6. We also recognise that certain types  flooding, rises in sea level, and accelerated 
of communities, such as rural and coastal  coastal erosion which will have the potential 
communities, face significant and unique  to affect public services and infrastructure. 
challenges. For example, the increased age  However different types of localities may also 
of rural housing makes it both more difficult  have opportunities available to them that do 
and expensive to introduce energy efficiency  not exist everywhere. For instance, coastal 
measures and rural communities also have  communities may be able to utilise tidal 
greater reliance on cars. Similarly coastal  energy or industrial scale water source heat 
communities face significant challenges as  pumps, and rural areas may have access to 
they may be vulnerable to more frequent  sustainable biomass.
262Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
7. There are currently no net zero statutory  8. Central and local government will need 
targets on local authorities or communities  to work closely together to deliver net zero 
in the UK, and we do not believe that a new  and our interim carbon budgets. Government 
general statutory requirement is needed.  analysis suggests that over 30% of the 
This is because of the existing level of local  emissions reductions needed across all 
commitment with the sector, and because  sectors to deliver on our Carbon Budget 6 
it is difficult to create a uniform requirement  target, as set out in this strategy, rely on local 
that reflects the diversity of barriers and  authority involvement to some degree.44 
opportunities local places experience. 
However, we do understand that there is 
a real need to ensure local leaders across 
the board are supported by enhancing the 
capacity and capability of local areas to deliver 
net zero, coordinating engagement with local 
authorities, and clarifying expectations at a 
national level to accelerate local progress 
towards net zero.
Our goal
9. The government will continue to set UK- 11. Community empowerment, engagement, 
wide priorities for meeting carbon budgets  and action can play a role in supporting 
and for assessing how each sector will help  the UK’s transition to net zero and enable 
meet those budgets. Local government has  communities to access the benefits that it 
a key role in integrating delivery at a local and  brings, from greener jobs to improved health. 
regional level to deliver more cost-effective  Communities are especially well placed to 
routes to net zero and derive local co-benefits  help raise awareness and engage people in 
that embed climate action in the heart of local  adopting net zero behaviours. For example, 
places and services. By taking this approach,  community ownership of renewables and 
we can achieve even more for net zero and  other assets, often in partnership with other 
for the economy locally and nationally; we  organisations, can be an important driver of 
recognise that a one-size-fits-all approach will  reducing local emissions. It can also enable 
not work. We want to build strong partnership  people to learn more about climate change 
working between central, devolved, and local  and build sustainable behaviours.
government, increase the co-ordination and 
12. We will continue to provide support for 
better support all levels of government to 
public and private investment opportunities in 
utilise the influences available to them.
local places that will enable the local delivery 
10. We want to continue to empower our  of emissions savings across the sectors. In 
local leaders to take the actions which  the sector chapters we have shown the range 
will lead to the biggest gains in emissions  of programmes from building retrofit, heating, 
reduction, including the potential opportunities  electric vehicle charging and many others 
in building back greener and meeting our  where funding will go to local government to 
ambitions to level up the country. While the  deliver action in their communities.
COVID-19 pandemic has severely impacted 
our communities, it has also reshaped how we 
think about place, community, and our natural 
and built environment.
263Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Enabling local areas to deliver net zero
13. To support all local government  build on many of the existing ways of working 
in developing and delivering their net  together to provide more consistency and 
zero delivery plans, we need to act in  clarity over roles and responsibilities between 
three key areas: national and local government.
a.  Setting clearer expectations for local  15. We will do this by establishing a Local Net 
places, clarifying how the partnership  Zero Forum to ensure that there is direct input 
with local government should work,  from local leaders. Chaired by BEIS, the Forum 
and considering how action at national,  will be cross departmental and bring together 
regional, local, and community levels fits  national and local government senior officials 
together to tackle the emission and climate  on a regular basis to discuss policy and 
risk challenges we face, and the wider  delivery options on net zero. The forum will 
benefits the transition brings. build on our current engagement mechanisms 
through the representative bodies such as 
b.  Providing resources for local places to 
the Local Government Association (LGA), 
deliver stronger contributions to national 
Association for Public Service Excellence 
net zero targets, across dedicated funding 
(APSE), Core Cities and the Association of 
streams for net zero and non-ringfenced 
Directors of Environment, Economy, Planning 
funding, noting the number of broader 
& Transport (ADEPT). The creation of the 
priorities on which local government 
Forum also draws on the recommendations 
needs to deliver.
for a policy framework put forward by member 
c.  Building capacity and capability at the 
network UK100. The Forum will support the 
local level to support ambition and share 
establishment of clearer delivery roles for local 
best practice, while also providing support 
government and provide a single engagement 
in areas that may not have made as much 
route into HM Government in a coordinated 
progress to date.
and coherent way. 
14. To act effectively across these areas, 
16. On adaptation, local actors will be 
and for local government to translate national 
supported through increased Environment 
goals into local action, we will build on our 
Bill powers to take effective action, reduced 
existing engagement to improve the way local 
financial burdens from waste management 
and national government collaborate on net 
and stronger abilities to improve health and 
zero. The Department for Business, Energy 
social outcomes for local citizens.
and Industrial Strategy (BEIS) will take overall 
responsibility for improving coordination with  17. Achieving our aims requires 
local government and other local actors on  national decision makers to have the 
the effective design and delivery of local net  right knowledge and awareness to 
zero policies, as part of the Department’s  understand the local impacts of decisions. 
overall responsibility and wider leadership on  BEIS will work with other departments and  
delivering net zero. Other departments will  stakeholders to demonstrate successful net 
continue to lead on their specific policy areas  zero system solutions by creating a network of 
such as Department for Transport on the  experience that amalgamates learning through 
decarbonisation of transport. We intend to  case studies and non-spatial planning tools. 
264Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
18. We have already developed a Carbon  20. An important part of the funding 
Literacy toolkit for the delivery of Carbon  landscape is the diverse range of grant 
Literacy training for local authorities. This  funding schemes provided by HM 
training has been made available to all local  Government to support local delivery. 
authority staff and aims to increase awareness  The recent National Audit Office (NAO) 
and ability to reduce emissions across all the  review into local government and net zero 
policies and programmes local government  identified 22 dedicated grant schemes 
work on. BEIS has created a sector course  for net zero work from central to local 
and places like Manchester and Sheffield are  government. We recognise that longer term 
among the early adopters who have trained  and more co-ordinated funding streams can 
staff and councillors. enhance innovation and investment, reduce 
bureaucracy, and encourage more efficient 
Funding
and integrated decision making. We will 
explore how we could simplify and consolidate 
19. Funding for local climate action comes 
funds which target net zero initiatives at 
from a combination of the Local Government 
the local level where this provides the best 
Finance Settlement, other government 
approach to tackling climate change. Building 
grants and support schemes, borrowing, 
on the vision in the Prime Minister’s Ten Point 
and private finance. Collectively, this means 
Plan, we also will work across departments 
there is a range of funding available for local 
to explore how we can give certainty to 
authorities to act on climate change. Some 
investment in longer-term programmes 
have chosen to explore community bonds 
supported by regeneration initiatives.
and crowdfunding. A third of local authorities 
say their climate change plans will be cost-
21. In addition to the above, the UK 
neutral by incorporating goals into existing 
Infrastructure Bank (UKIB) will lend to local 
service area strategies, drawing on the funding 
authorities for strategic and high value projects 
available for those services.
and invest in projects alongside the private 
sector, crowding in private sector capital. 
It has twin objectives of helping to tackle 
climate change, particularly meeting the UK’s 
net zero emissions targets and helping to 
support regional and local economic growth 
across the UK. The UKIB will offer loans to 
local authorities for high value and strategic 
projects of at least £5 million. To complement 
this investment activity, over time, the UKIB 
will develop an expert advisory service to 
help local authorities develop and finance 
projects. The UKIB will build partnerships 
across the UK including with government 
departments, government sponsored bodies, 
local authorities and relevant representative 
organisations to foster collaboration and 
drive value for money. As it engages with the 
market, the UKIB will continue to learn and 
adapt, which will ensure that its loans to local 
authorities are as effective as possible.
265Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
22. The UKIB is currently operating in an  26. Better engagement and information 
interim form, as it expands its capability  sharing across organisations can enable better 
and capacity. It will continue to refine the  forward-planning and a more coordinated 
Local Authority Lending Function over  approach. BEIS has work underway with 
the coming months. Ofgem to develop a better understanding of 
the opportunities and challenges presented 
23. The Department for Business, Energy and 
by local area energy mapping and planning 
Industrial Strategy will continue to work with 
(LAEMP) and are considering the most 
partners and the finance sector to develop 
appropriate policy options to take forward. 
new finance and business models to support 
This work could help to bring together key 
local delivery. These business models will look 
local stakeholders to explore the impact of 
to develop aggregated projects and portfolios 
decarbonisation choices across sectors and 
of projects building up scale and spreading 
how different technology options may impact 
delivery risk more effectively for investors.
on local energy networks.
Sectoral priorities at a local level
27. The Government has committed up to 
£102.5 million of funding through the Industrial 
24. We understand that for local areas to 
Strategy Challenge Fund to Prospering from 
deliver net zero they will need specific support 
the Energy Revolution. This is an innovation 
to plan and identify priorities across different 
programme which develops smart local energy 
sectors of the economy.
systems to provide investable, scalable local 
Local energy business models and finance mechanisms 
using integrated approaches to deliver cleaner, 
25. Decarbonisation of our buildings, 
cheaper energy services. The programme is 
transport systems and energy system will 
supporting three places to demonstrate the 
require significant action at a regional and local 
use of this framework today and a further ten 
level. Generation and storage are becoming 
places to develop detailed plans and business 
increasingly decentralised, with solar and 
cases to deliver whole place decarbonisation.
batteries being deployed in buildings, vehicles, 
and local communities. Heat and transport  28. The programme is designed to work 
decarbonisation in particular needs to be  across a range of different areas including, 
delivered in a way that meets local needs and  big urban conglomerations, cities, towns, 
with the involvement of local decision makers.  industrial regions, regeneration projects and 
Decarbonisation will require strong co- rural communities. Each of these face different 
ordination across electricity, heat, hydrogen,  challenges and opportunities in reaching net 
transport, and buildings. That means local  zero and the programme seeks to identify 
actors can be strong drivers of change,  the economic as well as the social and 
enabling coordinated non-spatial planning and  environmental benefits of delivering integrated 
engagement with markets, and supporting  Smart Local Energy Systems, not just for the 
cleaner, cheaper and more efficient energy  place but also nationally.
whilst providing a significant contribution 
towards local economic strategy.
266Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
29. The government also provides funding  efficiency measures. Under Phase 1 of the 
to deliver programmes that support  scheme, over £500 million was awarded to 
decarbonisation through the Local Net Zero  local authorities.
Programme (previously known as the Local 
31. National planning policies already 
Energy Programme), which is supporting 
recognise the importance of sustainable 
Local Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs), local 
development and make clear that reducing 
authorities, and communities in England to 
carbon emissions should be considered in 
play a leading role in decarbonisation and 
planning and decision making. The National 
clean growth. Almost £22 million has been 
Model Design Code provides tools and 
invested in the Local Energy programme to 
guidance for local planning authorities to help 
date, including funding for the creation and 
ensure developments respond to the impacts 
continuing support of 5 Local Net Zero Hubs. 
of climate change, are energy efficient, 
The Hubs promote best practice and support 
embed circular economy principles, and 
local authorities to develop net zero projects 
reduce carbon emissions. The government 
that can attract commercial investment. The 
is considering how the planning system can 
Hubs are currently supporting local authorities 
further support our commitment to reaching 
to develop projects with a potential capital 
net zero. We will make sure that the reformed 
value of over £2 billion and have identified 
planning system supports our efforts to 
further possible projects that take the potential 
combat climate change and help bring 
capital value of the pipeline to over £3 billion.
greenhouse gas emissions to net zero by 
Heat and buildings 2050. For example, as part of our programme 
of planning reform we intend to review the 
30. Local Authorities have been, and will 
National Planning Policy Framework to make 
continue to be, key delivery partners when it 
sure it contributes to climate change mitigation 
comes to improving the housing and building 
and adaptation as fully as possible.
stock across the country, especially through 
integrating activity on energy efficiency,  Local transport
heating and retrofit. This has been recognised 
32. To decarbonise the transport sector, in 
in recent years through their delivery of Green 
July, the government published its Transport 
Home Grants, Home Upgrade Grant, and 
Decarbonisation Plan, which sets out the 
heat networks. As demonstrated in previous 
commitments and the actions needed to 
chapters (Heat and Buildings), local delivery 
decarbonise the entire UK transport system. 
of these schemes has been integral in 
One of the six strategic priorities of the plan 
reducing carbon emissions and supporting 
is developing solutions that consider the 
local economies. For example, over 200 local 
needs of different locations, highlighting the 
authorities have taken part in phase 1 of the 
importance of tackling emissions at a local 
Green Home Grants Local Authority Delivery 
level to ensure that every place in the UK has 
Scheme (LAD) which is focussed on low-
its own net zero transport network by 2050, 
income households in homes that most need 
serving the unique needs of its communities.
energy efficiency upgrades. Phases 1 and 2 
of the Local Authority Delivery schemes aim 
to support around 50,000 households who 
will benefit from energy efficiency upgrades, 
making it easier and cheaper to heat their 
homes. Government has also delivered the 
Public Sector Decarbonisation scheme which 
provides grants for public sector bodies 
to fund heat decarbonisation and energy 
267Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
33. To support this, we will reform the way  35. The Environment Bill is also creating a 
local transport infrastructure is funded to drive  new system of spatial strategies called Local 
decarbonisation at a local level, engaging  Nature Recovery Strategies to target action for 
local areas about their investment priorities  nature and to drive the use of nature-based 
in the round, and making quantifiable carbon  solutions to tackle environmental challenges 
reductions a fundamental part of local  like climate change. It is expected that 
transport planning. Later this year we will also  there will be approximately 50 Local Nature 
publish a Local Authority Toolkit to help local  Recovery Strategies covering the whole 
authorities reduce emissions from transport. It  of England with no gaps and no overlaps. 
will provide local authorities with guidance and  Preparation of each Strategy will be locally 
information to help them build business cases,  led and collaborative, with local government 
develop innovative policies, secure funding,  taking a critical role. This will provide local 
and deliver measures on the ground. government with a new tool through which 
they can work with local partners to identify 
Local green infrastructure and the 
where effort to create or restore habitat would 
environment have greatest benefit for climate mitigation, 
whilst also having positive benefits for nature 
34. Government will launch a new National 
and the wider environment. Between 2021 
Framework of Green Infrastructure Standards 
and 2027, we will be doubling our overall 
in 2022. This will support local areas and 
investment in flooding and coastal erosion 
regions to deliver well-designed green 
to £5.2 billion.
infrastructure where it is most needed to 
deliver multiple benefits. These networks  36. In addition, £200 million will be invested 
of green and blue spaces and other  in the Innovative Flood and Coastal Resilience 
natural features, including trees, provide  Innovation Programme. This will help over 
an opportunity to benefit local economies  25 local areas over six years to take forward 
and bring about long-term improvements in  wider innovative actions that improve their 
people’s health and wellbeing. At the same  resilience to flooding and coastal erosion. 
time, it can help us to mitigate and adapt  The Environment Agency is also working with 
to climate change, through capturing and  coastal authorities on a £1 million refresh of 
storing carbon, shading and cooling, and  Shoreline Management Plans.
reducing flooding.
268Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
A universal offer to harness opportunities across the UK
37. We are committed to supporting all local  approach to tackling net zero in the round, 
areas and communities, ensuring that none  covering all net zero issues. The programme 
are left behind and creating net zero solutions  will continue to help places make faster 
which work for all of them. As we are reducing  progress towards net zero, improve cost-
emissions across the economy, we must  effectiveness, and significantly increase the 
also ensure that the transition to net zero  economic benefits of the green industrial 
is a fair one.  revolution by attracting commercial investment 
and supporting green jobs.
38. As outlined above, BEIS has been 
successfully running the Local Programme  39. The programme will focus on all areas of 
(previously known as the Local Energy  England, including those lacking capacity and 
Programme) to support all local areas  capability, or those facing unique challenges, 
capability and capacity to meet net zero and  such as rural and coastal communities. The 
government has committed to continuing the  programme will ensure that all local areas can 
Programme. The programme has developed  engage on issues relating to net zero.
over time and now takes a place-based 
Case study: Investing in industrial heartlands
The government has invested £95 million for two new offshore wind ports to 
be constructed in the Humber region and Teesside, boosting the UK’s world-
leading industry, and creating thousands of new jobs in the North.
Able Marine Energy Park, on the South Bank of the River Humber, will 
receive up to £75 million government investment, and Teesworks Offshore 
Manufacturing Centre, on the River Tees, will benefit from up to £20 
million. Construction will begin later this year to upgrade the two ports 
with new infrastructure - helping to revitalise these historic industrial 
heartlands. Together these new ports will have the capacity to house up to 
7 manufacturers to support the development of the next-generation offshore 
wind projects, boosting the UK’s offshore wind manufacturing base while 
directly creating up to 3,600 new green jobs.
40. The Government has embedded a net  and strengthen these criteria if necessary. 
zero principle in initiatives which target different  We will take the same approach with other 
types of places, such as the Levelling Up  new schemes and priority places such as 
Fund, the Towns Fund, and the Community  Freeports. Investment into places through the 
Renewal Fund. This is to ensure that all funded  UK Shared Prosperity Fund should also align 
schemes have considered how to align with  with the government’s net zero objectives.
our net zero ambitions. We will continue 
to monitor the impacts of these schemes 
269Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
41. This year we are working with local  42. In England, the government works 
businesses on the future role of Local  closely with local government, and Defra 
Enterprise Partnerships (LEPs), ensuring  hosts the Local Adaptation Advisory Panel 
local businesses continue to have clear  (LAAP), a forum for dialogue on climate 
representation and support in their area to  change adaptation between local authorities, 
drive the green recovery from the COVID-19  central government, and delivery bodies. 
pandemic. LEPs have played a significant  This supported the production of a guide on 
role in providing advice and incentives for  adaptation for local government, published 
businesses to reach net zero. As part of the  in 2019 by the Association of Directors 
LEP review, we are committed to ensuring  of Environment, Economy, Planning and 
a strong local business voice is retained,  Transport (ADEPT).
particularly to support businesses to 
transition to net zero.
Case study: the Green Recovery Challenge Fund
The government’s £80 million Green Recovery Challenge Fund is kickstarting 
over 150 nature projects across England. For example, the Wildfowl and 
Wetlands Trust was awarded £1.58 million to create and restore 130 hectares 
of nature-rich wetland habitat along the Somerset coast. This habitat will help 
increase flood resilience, improve soil, water quality, and help absorb carbon, 
increasing the robustness of the county’s coastline overall. The GRCF is also 
support green jobs and is currently on track to support up to 2,000 jobs by 
the end of 2021, rising to up to 2,500 by the time all projects are completed in 
March 2023.
Working with local communities 44. Some very ambitious campaigns on 
food, recycling, water, and other areas critical 
43. To ensure that all parts of the UK benefit 
to climate action, have been launched and 
from the transition to net zero we also want 
run by pioneering local communities and 
local communities to take bold action that 
activists. Community projects can also act as 
supports the transition. Local communities 
a catalyst for raising public awareness and 
benefit from strong relationships and ties to 
promoting green choices.
their areas and their local authorities; these 
can be key to reducing emissions across  45. Community groups can bring together 
the economy and making sure people  people, finance, and ideas to have a real 
stay engaged in the process. Where local  impact on the behaviours, infrastructure, and 
authorities and communities work together  attitudes locally. Community cohesion and 
effectively, we have already seen significant  grassroots initiatives are also central to locally 
improvements in both delivery and in wider  based resilience to climate change risks, such 
public engagement. as flooding and heatwaves.
270Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
46. Government understands the important  in Northeast Derbyshire developed a Town 
role that communities have in the transition  Investment Plan setting out their low carbon 
to net zero.  Through the introduction of  energy ambitions. Government also works 
UK-wide growth funding schemes, such as  with community groups, both geographic 
the Community Renewal Fund, the Levelling  and communities of interest, such as sports 
Up Fund, and the Towns Fund, Government  clubs, faith groups, and youth groups, 
is enabling local areas to tackle net zero  on key behaviour change strategies and 
goals in ways that best suit their needs. For  communications.
example, under the Towns Fund, Clay Cross 
Case study: Clay Cross
Clay Cross, in Northeast Derbyshire, was one of the 101 Towns invited to 
develop a Town Investment Plan. The plan, submitted to Government in 
October 2020, set out their ambition to establish the town as an exemplar 
at the forefront of the low carbon revolution. This involved working with 
established local businesses, including the key local employer Worcester 
Bosch, to deliver innovation in clean energy and showing the potential to 
deliver a net zero economy. By 2030 they hope to be able to show significant 
reductions in the overall levels of emissions by ensuring clean growth 
principles underpin investment. These ambitions will be realised through a 
cohort of projects which include the development of a low carbon energy 
strategy for the town, a low carbon energy demonstrator project linked to 
the rebuilding of the local leisure centre, low carbon workspace and housing 
proposals, and a skills and enterprise training centre, which will have an 
emphasis on providing energy industry related skills.
Community Energy 48. Government has provided support to 
community energy projects through the Rural 
47. Community Energy is an example of how 
Community Energy Fund (RCEF), a £10 million 
communities can come together to reach local 
fund to supporting community-run projects in 
and national net zero targets. Community 
England that benefit the energy transition to 
Energy England’s 2021 State of the Sector 
net zero. The fund has provided development 
Report outlined that there are 424 community 
stage grants to projects focusing on a variety 
energy organisations working across the 
of technologies including solar, wind, low 
UK to deliver a net zero future and with the 
carbon heating and electric vehicle charging. 
appropriate support, they estimate that the 
Communities have predominantly financed 
community energy sector could contribute 
their schemes commercially through share 
up to 5,270 MW, power 2.2 million homes, 
offers and borrowing.
support 8,700 jobs and add £1.8 billion to the 
economy each year.45
271Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
49. The Government has also supported 
Community Energy England to develop and 
maintain their knowledge sharing role which 
includes peer mentoring. This resource 
can help communities develop their own 
schemes across heat and power generation, 
transport, energy efficiency, and also wider 
approaches to net zero.
Case Study: Cuckmere Community Solar – a world first 
Cuckmere Community Solar has an ambition to power the rail network in East 
Sussex with solar energy – a world first. Working in collaboration with Riding 
Sunbeams, an innovator focused on decarbonising rail networks, the 
organisation aims to establish a template for similar projects.  
Cuckmere Community Solar plans to build a new 4 MW solar farm at Berwick, 
East Sussex. This will enable the local community to benefit from a higher 
income from renewable energy generation, and for the rail network to benefit 
from cheaper, low carbon power. The Rural Community Energy Fund has 
provided grant funding for the development stage of the project which 
includes the cost of studies, land agreements, investigation of the connection 
point, and legal work.  
The project has also recently received capital funding support from the South 
East Local Enterprise Partnership‘s £85 million share of the government’s 
Getting Building Fund, which aims to help economic recovery.
50. Ofgem also supports community  51. To build on our existing actions, we intend 
energy projects and following a consultation  to continue to work closely with Community 
process has announced that from February  Energy England and will reintroduce the 
2022 it plans to welcome applications from  Community Energy Contact Group. Since 
community interest groups, co-operative  2017, this group has been merged in a wider 
societies, and community benefit societies to  Local Energy Contact Group, but given the 
the Industry Voluntary Redress Scheme. This  scale and pace of work being taken forward, 
will allow groups to apply for funds to deliver  and with the development of the Local Net 
energy related projects that support energy  Zero Forum, we believe that it makes sense 
consumers in vulnerable situations, support  to strengthen our engagement with the 
decarbonisation, and will benefit people in  community sector further by reintroducing 
England, Scotland, and Wales. a dedicated forum for community groups to 
engage across Government.
272Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
4vi. Empowering the Public and 
Business to Make Green Choices
Moving towards a net zero society together
Our Key Commitments
•  Explore how to improve and enhance public facing climate content and advice on 
gov.uk. We will also enhance our digitally-led Simple Energy Advice (SEA) service to 
provide homeowners with personal, tailored advice on improving and decarbonising 
their homes, including tailored retrofit advice in local areas, and links to local, 
accredited, trusted installers.
•  Continue supporting UK businesses to meet their net zero commitments, including 
exploring a government-led advice service that consolidates and simplifies advice 
and other support on net zero.
•  Increase awareness of net zero and empower businesses and the public to make 
green choices, by building on government communications and engagement, and 
exploring providing environmental impact labelling of products, goods, and services. 
•  Make green choices affordable and easy by working with businesses and industry 
to set strong regulatory signals and collaborating to reduce costs and provide better 
quality, longer lasting and lower environmental impact products, and services.
273Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
The challenge Our Goal
1. Together we are moving towards a net  2. Our goal is to make the act of choosing 
zero society, led by technological innovation.  green significantly easier, clearer and cheaper. 
We will see transformations to our economy,  We recognise that the best way to do this 
society, and the way we live and work: new  is to go with the grain of existing behaviour 
low carbon technologies, infrastructure  and trends and by working closely with 
and job opportunities; cleaner air, greener  partners like Local Authorities, voluntary sector 
spaces and reduced flooding; and changes  organisations, social enterprise regulators, and 
to everyday life such as in the way we travel,  businesses, who all play an important role in 
heat our homes and save our money. To reach  how we use and choose different services.
net zero, everyone will need to play their part. 
We know that public concern about climate 
change is high – with 80% in the UK either 
concerned or very concerned.46 We also know 
that people and businesses recognise that 
change must happen – 80% of respondents 
in a recent survey believe the way we live our 
lives will need to change to address climate 
change.47 Equally, however we know that the 
public is unsure of what net zero will mean in 
practice, what steps they can take, or they 
face barriers that stop them from acting.48 
This chapter sets out how government will 
support individuals and businesses to make 
green choices – an act of choosing the more, 
or most, sustainable option from a range of 
possibilities, such as using an electric vehicle 
instead of a petrol or diesel vehicle when it is 
time to change your family car, replacing an 
old gas boiler with a heat pump, or switching 
to innovative green financial products.
274Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
The role of green choices in meeting net zero
3. There are numerous individual actions –  •  Everyday business and consumer 
some one-off and some we take regularly  choices, such as choosing green financial 
– that people can take to contribute to our  products like the recently launched NS&I 
pathway to net zero. These individual actions  Green Savings Bond, or seeking more 
combine to create wider systemic change  responsibly invested pension schemes.
required to meet net zero. New analysis on 
4. We want to better understand the 
green choices,49 has helped us to identify 
behavioural factors that need to be considered 
choices and behaviours that impact on net 
in the policies required to meet net zero. 
zero, broadly falling into three categories:
The Government Chief Scientific Adviser 
•  Adopting new low carbon  and Government Office for Science will be 
technologies, such as switching to zero  producing a scenario-based foresight report 
emission vehicles. to understand the system wide implications of 
these factors, to be published in 2022.
•  Using energy, technologies, or services 
more efficiently, such as using smart 
meter-enabled ‘time of use’ tariffs which 
reward consumers financially for using 
energy at off-peak times, or when there is 
excess clean energy available.
275Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Our approach for supporting green choices
5. We know that people want to play their  a.  Communicate a vision of a net zero 2050, 
part in achieving net zero. Our approach for  build a sense of collective action, improve 
how government will empower everyone to  understanding of the role different actors 
make green choices is underpinned by six  play in reaching net zero, and how and 
principles.50 Although they were developed  when choices can be made;
with the public in mind, many of them equally 
b.  Ensure there is trusted advice and 
apply to green choices taken by businesses, 
support for people and businesses to 
particularly medium or small enterprises. The 
make green choices;
principles reflects wider public engagement 
c.  Mobilise a range of actors and 
from across the country and Parliament.
stakeholders to increase and amplify their 
6. Public engagement, including through  communication and action on net zero and 
communications campaigns such as Together  green choices; and
for Our Planet, plays a significant role in 
d.  Give people opportunities to participate in 
driving green choices. We will deliver public 
and shape our plans for reaching net zero, 
engagement on net zero to:
thereby improving policy design, buy-in 
and uptake of policies.
276Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Principles underpinning green public and business choices
Principle 1: Minimise the ‘ask’ by  Principle 2: Make the green choice 
sending clear regulatory signals the easiest
7. By targeting measures at an industry level,  9. By addressing all the major, practical 
rather than at the individual consumer, we  barriers to individual behaviours we can make 
can make green choices much simpler for the  it easier for people to make green choices. We 
consumer. This will also help grow a stronger  will ensure that we take a consumer-centred 
market for low carbon goods and give  approach to net zero policy design, removing 
businesses clear, early signals. For example,  frictions and minimising disruptions to 
the 2030 phase out date for petrol and diesel  people’s lives. 
cars and vans sends a signal to industry and 
10. In our Transport Decarbonisation Plan, we 
will improve the availability and quality of zero 
have committed to better integrating transport 
emission vehicles on the market. Similarly, 
modes, with more bus routes serving railway 
as set out in the Heat and Buildings Strategy 
stations and improved integration of cycling 
there are a range of policies we will introduce 
and walking networks, so that opting to 
that will bolster the low carbon heating market, 
make a green travel choice is easier. This 
creating new opportunities for business, and 
is in addition to delivering interventions to 
better choice for the consumer.
enable more people to walk and cycle for 
8. We are taking action to ensure that  short journeys such as a national e-cycle 
products are more sustainable, both in relation  support programme. Our vision is that half of 
to their energy efficiency during use and  all journeys in towns and cities will be cycled 
use of materials over their lifetime (resource  or walked by 2030. We are also committed to 
efficiency) through developing proposals for  increasing road vehicle occupancy. This will 
new regulatory product standards and better  help decarbonise and decongest our roads. 
consumer information. We are exploring  We will publish guidance for local authorities 
updating and expanding ‘Ecodesign’ product  on support for shared car ownership and 
regulation which sets minimum requirements  shared occupancy schemes and services and 
to phase out the least energy and resource  are continuing to build our evidence base to 
efficient products from the market. understand the barriers and potential policies 
to increase the uptake of shared mobility.
11. We are committed to removing 
inconvenience and increasing availability of 
green choices. Following the commitments 
made in our Resources and Waste Strategy, 
the Environment Bill will introduce powers that 
will allow us to require separate food waste 
collections in all local authorities in England, 
which will help people to reduce emissions 
from food waste with ease. 
277Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Principle 3: Make the green choice  Principle 4: Empower people 
affordable and businesses to make their 
own choice.
12. We are already seeing the upfront cost of 
green choices, such as electric vehicles, drop.  15. Consumer preference can shape 
We are looking across all sectors to see how  producers’ decisions, but sometimes 
we can continue this trend and make green  consumers and businesses lack clear 
choices more affordable. information to make informed choices. As 
announced by the chancellor in his Mansion 
13. Through the Smart Export Guarantee 
House speech in July 2021, we will work with 
(SEG) energy suppliers are moving to 
the Financial Conduct Authority to introduce a 
increasingly innovative tariffs which support 
sustainable investment label - a quality stamp 
electric vehicle deployment while continuing 
- so that consumers and retail investors can 
to enable households to access a market-led 
clearly compare the impacts and sustainability 
route for exporting and receiving payment for 
of their investments for the first time. 
their unused electricity. As committed to in 
our Heat and Buildings Strategy, the Boiler  We plan to help empower people to make 
Upgrade Scheme will provide grants to help  informed choices about the goods and 
households transition to low carbon heating.  products they buy and services they use by 
We are also supporting motorists through  exploring how we better label these with their 
plug-in vehicle grants, which provide support  emission intensity and environmental impact. 
towards the upfront purchase of eligible cars,  We are also exploring the use of product 
vans, motorcycles, and trucks. labelling to show the durability, repairability 
and recyclability of products, as well as 
14. We are supporting the public to both save 
their environmental footprint with a view to 
and contribute towards public spending that 
stimulating demand for better quality items. 
helps the UK reduce its emissions through 
We continue to explore the evidence base for 
the NS&I Green Savings Bond. The Green 
environmental labelling within food production 
Finance Institute and Abundance Investment, 
and disposal, including the most accurate 
supported by UK100, Local Partnerships 
methodologies to monitor and verify the 
and Innovate UK, have also launched a 
carbon emissions, and environmental impact, 
national campaign to help local authorities 
of food items. 
issue a type of municipal finance investment 
– Local Climate Bonds. For citizens, the Local  16. Our Transport Decarbonisation Plan 
Climate Bond provides a low-risk and fixed  outlines how we will explore the feasibility of 
return investment, and a way to mobilise  a travel reward scheme that uses peer-driven 
their savings to help tackle the climate  motivation and encourages individuals to 
change in their area. switch to, or continue to use, sustainable 
modes of travel. 
17. We are providing tailored advice and 
support to homeowners on what they can do 
to improve their homes. Our Simple Energy 
Advice service has already had over 1.5 
million users, providing homeowners with 
personal, tailored advice for improving and 
decarbonising their homes and links to local, 
accredited, trusted installers. Homeowners 
can also find out about government schemes 
278Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
for which they may be eligible. We will  19. We know that technologies can also 
enhance the digitally led service and are  improve public understanding of energy use 
considering options to support tailored retrofit  and energy efficiency. In-Home Displays for 
advice in local areas, supported by tailored  smart meters give accurate information about 
local advice.  This includes moving our Simple  energy consumption to help households 
Energy Advice service to gov.uk, which will  easily understand how to use less energy and 
improve user experience, and supporting local  save money on their bills. Building on this, 
advice provision.  the Smart Energy Savings initiative is trialling 
how innovative products and services can use 
18. We are also reviewing other existing digital 
smart meter data to provide consumers with 
information and advice services related to 
advice on how to manage their energy use. At 
net zero and exploring how to improve wider 
the end of June 2021, there were 25.2 million 
existing public-facing net zero content and 
smart and advanced meters in homes and 
advice on gov.uk
small businesses across Great Britain.51 
279Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Principle 5: Motivate & build public  22. The Devolved Administrations have a 
acceptability for major changes range of initiatives aimed at engaging and 
motivating the public around net zero and 
20. Achieving our net zero target must be  climate action:
a shared endeavour. It is therefore vital that 
a.  The Scottish Government launched a draft 
we listen to the publics views on how to 
Public Engagement Strategy for Climate 
reach net zero. We already regularly invite the 
Change in December 2020, and the final 
public to shape policies on net zero through 
report of Scotland’s Climate Assembly was 
consultations and deliberative dialogues. Since 
laid in Scottish Parliament in June 2021.
2019, we have run, funded, or are still running 
deliberative dialogues on a range of net  b.  The Welsh Government Engagement 
zero issues, such as green choices, homes,  Approach for Low Carbon Delivery Plan 2 
heating, transport decarbonisation, green  was published in June 2021, encouraging 
savings, hydrogen, food, Carbon Capture Use  collective action on climate change 
and Storage (CCUS) and Advanced Nuclear  through four Calls to Action.
Technologies (ANT).
c.  In March 2021, the Northern Ireland 
Executive unveiled a new digital climate 
21. To ensure that the transition to net zero 
action campaign, delivered by MyNI in the 
is fair and affordable, and does not negatively 
run up to the COP26 conference. It aims 
impact disadvantaged groups, we are 
to raise climate awareness, encourage 
committed to assessing the impact of our net 
change, enable action, and exemplify 
zero policies. We consult on policy changes 
climate leadership.
and we will continue to make it easier for 
people and businesses, including those who 
Principle 6: Present a clear vision 
are most marginalised, to feed into key policy 
of how we will get to net zero 
decisions on net zero.
and what the role of people and 
business will be
280Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
The role of business in 
delivering net zero
Businesses have significant power to drive  To underline the importance of this area, 
change towards achieving our domestic  the Prime Minister appointed a net zero 
net zero goal. Our approach to supporting  Business Champion, Andrew Griffith MP, to 
businesses to deliver this change will need to  spearhead business engagement nationwide 
be differentiated by business size and sector,  in the year to COP26. Already over half of 
as these factors will influence the ease with  the FTSE100 companies have committed 
which a net zero target and other relevant  to Science-Based Targets by joining the 
actions can be adopted. We have seen  global Race to Zero campaign. Alongside 
significant numbers of companies signing up  engaging large corporates, the Net Zero 
to science based targets alongside sector- Business Champion has led a campaign 
specific ambition being put forward already.  targeting small and micro businesses across 
For example, Water UK has launched the  the UK. Over 1,900 have joined the Race to 
world’s first sector-wide plan to deliver net  Zero to date by visiting the Business Climate 
zero carbon emissions by 2030.  Hub, developed in partnership with a global 
business coalition led by the International 
We know that businesses account for 18% of 
Chambers of commerce. Companies, 
UK territorial emissions and so encouraging 
particularly large businesses, once they 
them to take action to reduce their emissions 
have joined the Race to Zero, should work 
is important.52 But just as vital is the role 
with others to drive breakthroughs in their 
businesses are playing in designing the 
sectors, regions, and support SMEs in 
ground-breaking new technologies, world 
their value chains to take action. We’re 
leading products and innovative approaches 
encouraging Business Representative 
that we need to develop the low carbon 
Organisations (BROs) to become Race to 
economy and enable others to reach net 
Zero Accelerators by recruiting members into 
zero. Collaboration across sectors and value 
the Race to Zero. To be recognised officially 
chains will enable us to innovate faster, 
as an Accelerator, businesses must recruit at 
create stronger incentives for investment and 
least 20% of members not already in Race 
drive down costs for low carbon alternatives 
to Zero by COP26.
through the global mechanisms laid out in the 
Paris Agreement. Many businesses across the UK have said 
they want to tackle climate change, but that 
they don’t know where to start53. Through the 
small business campaign, government has 
taken an important step towards making net 
zero relevant to SMEs by helping them access 
the support they need. Beyond COP26 we 
will continue to support UK businesses to 
meet their net zero commitments, including 
exploring a government-led digital advice 
service that consolidates and simplifies advice, 
funding, and other support on net zero.
281Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
For larger businesses, we want to ensure 
businesses are aware of their energy and 
carbon use so they can take action towards 
reaching net zero. Climate risks must be 
assessed and disclosed through the Task 
Force on Climate-related Finance Disclosures 
(TCFD). This is complemented by Streamlined 
Energy and Carbon Reporting, which requires 
energy and emissions reporting in all UK large 
businesses to improve awareness of energy 
costs. We also require large businesses and 
their corporate groups to carry out a broader 
assessment of their energy use from buildings, 
transport and industrial processes every 4 
years under the Energy Savings Opportunity 
Scheme (ESOS), which is designed to identify 
practicable and cost-effective energy saving 
opportunities. In the future building users and 
decision makers will be able to compare the 
performance of their buildings to other similar 
buildings using a performance-based energy 
rating to support targeted investments.
Government will work in partnership not just 
with businesses themselves, BROs, sector-
based trade associations, business groups 
in the Devolved Administrations and local 
and regional organisations to translate the 
pathways within this strategy into business 
specific plans to reach net zero.
282Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
23. Supporting people to make green choices  ‘One Step Greener’ Ambassadors come from 
will be a collective effort between government,  all walks of life in their pursuit of a greener 
businesses, voluntary sector, social enterprise  future and demonstrate how going one 
and community groups, local authorities,  green step can culminate in a large collective 
media organisations and others. However, we  impact in helping to make the UK a more 
know that others look to Government to set  sustainable place. 
the narrative on how we should get to net zero 
25. We will build on the success of Together 
and what people’s role will be.
for Our Planet, through which the UK business 
24. We will build on government  community is demonstrating global leadership 
communications and engagement on net  in efforts to combat climate change, with over 
zero to increase awareness of how we plan to  1,900 SMEs signed up to reach net zero by 
deliver the net zero target in the UK. Building  2050. Up and down the country, local high 
on the momentum of COP26, the Together  street shops are proudly displaying their 
for our Planet campaign is showcasing how  climate leadership by sharing their net zero 
people across the UK are going “One Step  journey on social media. Examples include 
Greener” to tackle climate change - from the  Caribe Coffee, a family run coffee business 
engineers working on the offshore wind farms  in Northumbria, John Sankey, a sustainable 
now powering our homes and businesses,  furniture maker in Derbyshire, and SilverHare, 
to local initiatives encouraging children and  a jewellery maker in West Cornwall. In doing 
parents to walk to school. The campaign  so, they are acting as changemakers in 
demonstrates that taking a single step can  their local communities. The focus of the 
have a positive impact on the environment,  campaign in the run-up to COP26 has 
using the inspiring stories of 26 One Step  been on encouraging business to make net 
Greener Ambassadors who are playing their  zero pledges. After COP26, we commit to 
part for the planet - be it by walking to work,  continuing to support businesses to meet 
repairing their clothes, or reducing their food  their commitments whilst developing their 
waste - to encourage others to join them. The  climate resilience.
283Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
4vii. International Leadership and 
Collaboration
Accelerating the global transition to a resilient net zero future
Our Key Commitments
•  Increase global climate action through our push for global net zero, including our 
COP26 Presidency objective to keep 1.5˚C within reach. As part of this, strengthen 
international collaboration in key sectors including by working with others to 
accelerate the innovation and deployment of clean technology and continue to 
convene the Zero Emission Vehicle Transition Council, the Energy Transition Council, 
the FACT dialogue, and other flagship initiatives that will be announced at COP26.
•  Deliver against net zero on a trajectory in line with the Paris Agreement, 
decreasing UK emissions by at least 68% by 2030 as set out in our 
Nationally Determined Contribution,54 78% by 2035 compared to 1990 levels 
in line with our Sixth Carbon Budget.
•  Double our International Climate Finance to at least £11.6 billion between 2021 and 
2025 to support net zero support adaptation and build resilience internationally. 
Within this, invest at least £3 billion in solutions that protect and restore nature, 
and £200 million at a minimum to help countries access technical exprtise to limit 
emissions and build back greener. 
•  Drive international innovation in key low carbon technologies through Mission 
Innovation, including co-leading the Green Powered Future and Clean 
Hydrogen Missions.
•  Lead by example internationally on inclusive climate policies, Action for Climate 
Empowerment and support for the UNFCCC Gender Action Plan.
•  Set out a clear vision and priorities to guide UK international climate and nature 
action in the coming decade through a 2030 Strategic Framework, and publish 
a refreshed Export Strategy outlining HMG support for exporters in the low 
carbon economy.
284Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
The challenge
1. Meeting our shared objective of avoiding  2. UK emissions account for about 1% of 
dangerous climate change requires a  the global total.56 To accelerate progress 
dramatic, global acceleration of progress  towards a resilient net zero future, we need to 
towards net zero CO  emissions by mid- play a prominent role in promoting collective 
2
century and net zero greenhouse gas  global action, working together to ensure 
emissions (GHG) by around 2070.55 Over  the transition is quicker, cheaper, and easier 
2020-21 there has been considerable  for all building on a strong foundation of 
progress, with all G7 countries, over half of  domestic action.
the G20, and around 75% of global emissions 
3. The transition to net zero must be 
now covered by net zero targets. However, 
supported by a joined-up approach to halting 
the world is still not on track to reach the 
biodiversity loss. The two are inextricably 
Paris Agreement temperature goal, which 
linked: the greatest drivers of biodiversity 
aims to limit global warming to well below 
loss, land use change and agriculture are 
2°C and pursue efforts to limit warming to 
also responsible for approximately one fifth 
1.5°C, compared to pre-industrial levels. 
of global GHG emissions. Simultaneously, 
More must be done to turn these targets into 
climate change itself is a direct driver of 
immediate action.
biodiversity loss,  and terrestrial and marine 
ecosystems act as carbon sinks for human-
driven CO  emissions.57
2
Our goal
4. As set out in the Integrated Review of  and we can create level playing fields. This 
Security, Defence, Development and Foreign  international collaboration will make the 
Policy (the Integrated Review), tackling climate  transition to net zero cheaper, faster, and 
change and biodiversity loss is the number  more accessible for all countries. This is not a 
one international priority for the UK for the  matter of shouldering a burden between us, 
coming decade.58 but of sharing an opportunity. It will support 
the UK’s own transition and stimulate UK 
5. As the world recovers from the COVID-19 
jobs and prosperity.59 Over the past decade 
pandemic our actions must be aligned with 
alone, we have seen over an 80% drop 
the Paris Agreement to ensure a fair and 
in the costs of clean energy technologies 
inclusive ransition to net zero. This includes 
thanks to technology innovation, learning-
enhancing adaptive capacity, strengthening 
by-doing, and greater deployment at scale 
resilience, and reducing vulnerability to 
domestically and globally.60
climate change.
7. Collaboration across borders and 
6. The international emissions reductions 
society is a key aim for our COP26 and G7 
required to keep 1.5 degrees warming within 
Presidencies. Beyond these, we will continue 
reach are only achievable if the international 
to advocate for enhanced international 
community works together. And by working 
collaboration, and coordinate action across 
together, we can create stronger incentives 
science, innovation, finance, and trade.
for investment, we can innovate faster, we 
can achieve economies of scale more quickly 
285Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Delivering our Paris Agreement commitments
Mitigation International Climate Finance (ICF)
8. Parties to the Paris Agreement shall  10. The UK’s ICF helps over 100 developing 
communicate ambitious short-term targets  countries mitigate and adapt to the impacts 
to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions  of climate change. This includes supporting 
through Nationally Determined Contributions  countries’ resilience to the damaging effects 
(NDCs) and should strive to underpin these  of climate change, accelerating the clean 
targets with credible pathways set out in Long  energy transition, supporting low carbon 
Term Strategies (LTSs). infrastructure, and investing in climate change 
solutions that protect and restore nature 
9. The UK’s NDC commits us to reducing our 
and biodiversity.
economy-wide GHG emissions by at least 
68% by 2030, compared to 1990 levels.61 This  11. The UK has committed to doubling 
strategy sets out the UK’s plans to deliver on  our ICF to at least £11.6 billion between 
the NDC and reach net zero by 2050 and will  2021-2025, including at least £3 billion for 
be submitted to the UNFCCC as our revised  nature and biodiversity.62 This forms part of an 
LTS under the Paris Agreement. ambition by developed countries to mobilise 
$100 billion in climate finance annually. 
We have also committed to aligning all UK 
Official Development Assistance (ODA) with 
the Paris Agreement and ensuring that all 
new UK bilateral aid spending does no harm 
to nature. This delivers on our Integrated 
Review objective of investing in a nature-
positive economy.
2021 cumulative UK ICF Achieved results
(2011-2021, last year’s in brackets) 
88 million 41 million 180 million
people supported to cope with  people improved access people avoided or reduced tonnes 
the effects of climate change to clean energy  of greenhouse gas emissions 
(66 million)  (33 million)  (31 million) 
2,400 MW  £5.2 billion  £3.3 billion 
capacity of clean public finance mobilised private finance mobilised
energy installed  for climate change   for climate change  
(2,000 MW)  (£4.1 billion)    (£2.2 billion) 
Source: BEIS analysis (2021)
286Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
12. UK ICF is stimulating a shift in private  attaché network embedded in UK Embassies 
finance mobilisation for climate action from  and High Commissions. UK Partnering for 
the billions to the trillions. Between 2011  Accelerated Climate Transitions (UK PACT) is 
and 2021, UK ICF mobilised £3.3 billion of  supporting developing countries with potential 
private finance for climate change purposes in  for high emissions reductions to build the 
developing countries.63 We target investment  knowledge and expertise required to both 
in dveloping economies with the highest  develop and implement the ambitious plans 
potential to accelerate the global transition to  needed to limit emissions and realise the 
net zero, ensuring that everyone can share the  opportunities of clean growth.
opportunities of clean growth sooner.
14. For all new and existing International 
13. We support the work of key multilateral  Climate Finance programmes, we will ask 
funds and have significant bilateral  delivery and monitoring partners to include 
programming drawing on UK experience  analysis of the impacts of programmes on 
and expertise, enabled by the diplomatic  certain groups of people to manage any 
work of our climate, energy and environment  negative impacts.64
Case study: UK-Colombia Partnership for Sustainable Growth
Through our Partnership for Sustainable Growth, the UK is working with 
Colombia to help drive real world emissions reductions and global climate 
ambition. The partnership and UK programmes are supporting Colombia 
to reduce deforestation, accelerate the energy transition, and conserve 
biodiversity. For example, UK technical assistance helped deliver Colombia’s 
first renewable energy auction in 2020 – which will increase solar and 
wind capacity in the country from 50 MW to nearly 2,500 MW – as well 
as the development of the country’s strategic planning for a low carbon 
energy sector through skill-shares with UK experts. Our strong climate 
partnership has also supported increased ambition in line with the goals 
of the Paris Agreement and a net-zero future, with Colombia committing 
in 2020 to cut 51% of greenhouse gas emissions by 2030, compared to a 
projected scenario.
287Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
15. Climate change disproportionately affects  in an inclusive way. This is the first time 
the world’s poorest and can exacerbate  donor countries will have set out how they 
economic and social disparities. However,  will support this transition, including through 
local communities and indigenous knowledge  financial flows for quality local jobs in the most 
systems can also play a key role in solutions. vulnerable communities.
16. As part of our incoming COP26  17. Low carbon transitions should be fair 
Presidency, the UK has developed a  and affordable and not negatively impact 
framework that aims to guide investment  disadvantaged groups.65 We are committed 
towards a global net zero transition that also  to monitoring the impacts of our climate and 
supports the UN’s Sustainable Development  clean energy policies, and any disparities 
Goals. The framework will indicate how  which arise, to assess the need for targeted 
support for developing countries and  support for disproportionately impacted 
emerging economies can accelerate climate  groups, in line with the UNFCCC Gender 
ambition and enable a global green recovery  Action Plan and domestic law.
Influencing global action
COP26 Presidency •  Cash: developed countries to make 
good on their promise to mobilise at least 
18. The four goals of our COP26 Presidency 
$100 billion in climate finance per year 
are: (1) mitigation to secure global net 
through to 2025.
zero by mid-century to keep 1.5°C within 
•  Cars: to accelerate the shift to zero 
reach; (2) adapting to protect communities 
emission vehicles (ZEVs), pushing for 
and natural habitats; (3) mobilising finance  
all new car sales in leading markets to 
and (4) collaboration: working together to 
be ZEV by 2035.
deliver, finalising the Paris Rulebook and 
accelerate action to tackle the climate crisis  20. Our COP26 Presidency has defined five 
through collaboration between governments,  areas vital to a zero-carbon future: energy 
businesses, and civil society. transitions, clean transport, nature-based 
solutions, adaptation and resilience, and, tying 
19. There will also be a renewed focus 
it all together, finance. We are working with 
on accelerating near-term action in the 
those affected by climate change and with 
top priority areas of coal phase out, zero-
wider civil society to harness innovation and 
emission vehicles, climate finance and halting 
commitment in these areas and will continue 
deforestation. We will ask countries to sign up 
this work throughout our COP26 Presidency 
to initiatives under each goal:
year up to November 2022.
•  Coal: to push for an immediate end to new 
unabated coal power and international 
coal financing, and the scaling up of 
low carbon power to rapidly move away 
from existing coal.
•  Trees: to halt natural forest loss by 2030 
and restoring millions of hectares of 
degraded landscapes and forestlands. This 
is alongside improving governance and 
increasing forest finance. 
288Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Case study: 2020 Climate Ambition Summit
A major milestone ahead of COP26 was the 2020 Climate Ambition Summit, 
co-convened by the UK, UN, and France, in partnership with Chile and Italy. 
This landmark event demonstrated how we can help drive collective ambition 
by combining major domestic commitments with diplomatic engagement, 
working closely with multilateral organisations and international partners.
Achievements included more ambitious Nationally Determined Contributions 
(NDCs) from 45 leaders. We also saw 24 countries announce new commitments, 
plans or strategies to reach net zero, and a UK announcement on ending direct 
government support the for fossil fuel energy sector overseas. When the UK was 
confirmed as host of COP26, less than 30% of global GDP was signed up to net 
zero or carbon neutrality commitments. Again, thanks in part to UK leadership, 
that figure is now over 80% - and rising.
We will continue to encourage all countries to set targets to get to net zero by 
2050, and more ambitious 2030 emissions reduction targets to get us there. 
We are also encouraging countries to publish Adaptation Communications 
or National Adaptation Plans. We will use COP26 and our Presidency year to 
turn these commitments into action to make the next ten years the decade 
of delivery.
289Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
G7 Presidency and G20 23. As part of our G7 Presidency, the UK 
hosted several follow-up workshops including 
21. Under our 2021 G7 Presidency, members 
on Net Zero Sectors and the Industrial 
committed to becoming ‘a net zero G7 
Decarbonisation Agenda (IDA). G7 members 
by 2050 at the latest’; ensuring a green 
supported the idea of using the IDA to unlock 
recovery from COVID-19 that is sustainable, 
market potential through high-level G7 
resilient, and inclusive; phasing out new 
government coordination and collaboration 
direct government support for international 
on ambitious industrial decarbonisation 
fossil fuel energy, and pursuing commitments 
initiatives. Driving international cooperation on 
to support those most vulnerable to the 
decarbonisation will help to diffuse ‘first mover’ 
impacts of climate change and environmental 
risks and address carbon leakage risks at the 
degradation. These have helped to lay the 
outset. The IDA is due to be integrated into the 
foundation for COP26.
rotating G7 Presidency with Germany taking 
ownership in 2022. During the rest of our G7 
22. As inclusivity was at the heart of the 
Presidency, we will work with our partners to 
UK’s G7 Presidency, these commitments are 
consider how best to coordinate efforts on 
underpinned by pledges to support affected 
the pricing of carbon to mitigate emissions, 
workers and sectors so that no person, group, 
and to explore international solutions to 
or geographic region is left behind.
prevent carbon leakage, helping us deliver 
the transformational change required by the 
Paris Agreement.
290Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Key G7 climate commitments
•  Submitting net zero-aligned NDCs to 2030  •  Decarbonising hard-to-abate sectors, 
and LTSs to 2050 ahead of COP26; including through a new UK-US-led 
Industrial Decarbonisation Agenda;
•  Reaffirming the collective developed 
country goal to jointly mobilise $100 billion  •  Launching a new partnership to modernise 
per year through to 2025; development finance tools to build back 
better for the world, including for resilient 
•  Increasing adaptation finance, including 
infrastructure and technologies to address 
a commitment to submit adaptation 
the impacts of climate change; 
communications ahead of COP26;
•  Pledging cooperation on the risk of carbon 
•  Accelerating the transition away from 
leakage and to aligning trading practices 
unabated coal capacity and to an 
with the Paris Agreement; and
overwhelmingly decarbonised power 
system in the 2030s; •  Recognising the potential of carbon 
pricing to foster emission reductions, 
•  Ending new direct government support for 
while ensuring environmental and social 
unabated international thermal coal power 
considerations are accounted for.
generation by the end of 2021, alongside 
phasing out new direct government 
support for international fossil fuel energy 
as soon as possible;
•  Increasing the pace of the global 
decarbonisation of the road transport 
sector throughout the 2020s and beyond;
291Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
24. The G20 includes both developed and  and to urge each other to develop long 
developing nations. Its members are jointly  term strategies in line with keeping the 
responsible for approximately 80% of global  1.5°C temperature goal within reach. The 
emissions66 and more than 80% of global  UK will advocate for further action from the 
GDP67: it must play a leading role in global  G20 to meet the commitments of the Paris 
efforts to tackle climate change. In July  Agreement. The Leaders’ Summit in Rome 
2021, UK Climate and Energy Ministers met  in October, on the eve of COP26, will be a 
with their G20 counterparts in Naples to  crucial moment to build consensus for urgent 
agree to accelerate action in the 2020s, to  and ambitious action on climate change and 
submit ambitious 2030 targets by COP26,  the clean energy transition.
Facilitating a global transition
25. The global move to a green and net zero  27. Collaborative action also sends clearer 
economy will require accelerated transitions  market signals to businesses and consumers 
across all major emitting sectors – including  about the global direction of travel. This 
power, transport, buildings, industry and  confidence in a credible global net zero 
agriculture, forests and land-use. All countries,  pathway is especially important for the 
including the UK, can benefit from greater  harder to abate sectors, such as heavy 
collaboration to help achieve their net zero  industry, where we know that the pace of 
targets more quickly and more cheaply. emissions reduction will progress more slowly 
up to 2030. However, action is needed 
26. Across the global economy, different 
in these sectors now to lay the significant 
sectors are experiencing the transition at 
groundwork required to set the path for future 
different speeds (see infographic below for 
emission reductions.
one interpretation of the progress by sector). 
International collaboration focused at the  28. We will therefore continue to work with 
sector level can accelerate action towards our  countries to accelerate sectoral technologies 
global goals, which is why it is a key focus  at COP26 and beyond – including continuing 
for the UK. This includes delivering faster  to convene the Zero Emission Vehicle 
innovation through coordinating on research,  Transition Council, the FACT Dialogue, and the 
development, and demonstration of clean  Energy Transition Council – as well as working 
technologies, as well as faster deployment  with partners to set a common vision for the 
of technologies, by coordinating on policy,  next decade of clean technology innovation 
finance, and trade measures to create new  and deployment at COP26.
demand, economies of scale, and supply 
chains for clean technologies.
292Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Figure 30: The sectoral S-curve
EMERGENCE DIFFUSION RECONFIGURATION
e
r
a
h
s
et 
k
r
a
m Coordinated   Coordinated   Coordinated standards and 
y  development and   policies to expand  incentives - to ensure change 
g
o testing of new   deployment - to   throughout the whole sector
ol
n technologies - to   increase economies 
h
c accelerate learning of scale and improve 
e
n t performance
o
si
s
mi
e
ro  1
e 2
z
r  3
o
w  10 9 8 7 6 5 4 Power
o
L Cars
Buildings
Trucks Time or cumulative production
Agriculture & Land Use
Aviation
Shipping
Steel
Cement Source: Victor, D.G., Geels, F.W. and Sharpe, S., 2019 Accelerating the Low Carbon 
Plastics Transition: The Case for Stronger,  More Targeted and Coordinated International Action
293Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Case study: COP26 Energy Transition Campaign
Our COP26 Energy Transition Campaign will help accelerate the global 
transition from coal to renewables, enabling the energy sector to achieve 
net zero. The UK is working through the Powering Past Coal Alliance (PPCA) 
and the Energy Transition Council (ETC) up to, and beyond, COP26. This 
will strengthen the coalition of countries, sub-national governments, and 
businesses phasing out unabated coal power and reduce international 
coal finance.
Solar and wind power are now cheaper than new coal and gas power 
plants in two-thirds of the world.68 The Energy Campaign will bring together 
countries, development banks, investors and civil society to strengthen low 
carbon power investment and assistance so that it is viable for every country.
The UK has also worked with the IEA to launch a COP26 Product Efficiency 
Call to Action, to double the efficiency of four key products (air conditioners, 
refrigerators, industrial motors, and lighting) by 2030. These four products 
combined currently account for more than a third of global electricity 
consumption. Global action to improve product efficiency will lead to a 
significant reduction in the energy sector’s carbon emissions.
The UK driving inclusive  30. The UK remains committed to 
strengthening the evidence base and 
climate action
understanding of differentiated impacts of 
29. We will drive forward our commitment  climate change on men and women, the role 
under the ‘Equal by 30 Campaign’ to  of women as agents of change and on equal 
work towards equal pay, leadership, and  opportunities for women. We continue to 
opportunities for women in the global clean  support amongst other things, increasing the 
energy sector by 2030, and champion  proportion of women and girls in decision-
increased gender representation across the  making and leadership positions, supporting 
UK’s international organisations. their access to finance, education, building 
their resilience to climate change, and 
improving data on gender and inclusion.
294Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Science and innovation 32. The UK will continue to use its 
world-leading position in climate-related 
31. Science and innovation are essential 
science and innovation to build global 
to achieve global climate goals. The UK 
multidisciplinary networks and facilitate 
will continue to work closely with countries 
knowledge exchange to support effective 
to drive innovation, research, and aligned 
global climate action through initiatives 
policy to ensure that clean technologies 
such as Mission Innovation, the Adaptation 
become cheaper and more readily available. 
Research Alliance, and the Visions for a 
The UK will also continue to promote the 
Net-Zero Future project.
vital role of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) and other scientific 
research, ensuring the best available science 
is accessible and understood by all, enabling 
informed decision-making across the world.
Case study: Mission Innovation
The UK has played a leading role in Mission Innovation (MI) since it launched 
at COP21 as the primary intergovernmental forum focused on clean energy 
innovation essential to achieving net zero. We have more than doubled our MI 
baseline clean energy innovation spend over the past five years, exceeding 
our MI commitment.
The second phase of Mission Innovation (MI 2.0) was launched in June 2021, 
bringing together countries responsible for more than 90% of global R&D 
clean energy investment and committed to a decade of action and investment 
in innovation for clean energy solutions. Commitments included developing 
National Innovation Pathways describing enhanced ambition to pioneer clean 
energy technologies and sectors.
The UK is co-leading two of the three Missions. Launched as part of MI 2.0, 
The Green Powered Future Mission is bringing together governments and 
businesses to enable the transition to variable renewable power. The Clean 
Hydrogen Mission aims to make clean hydrogen cost competitive. The UK is 
also participating in the Zero-Emission Shipping Mission which aims for ships 
capable of running on zero-emission fuels to comprise at least 5% of the 
global deep sea fleet by 2030.
295Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Trade 35. While there are significant opportunities 
for UK trade to support our climate and 
33. The whole system shift that will be 
nature ambitions as we transition to net 
required for the UK to reach net zero will 
zero, it is important we ensure that our 
also mean changes to how and what we 
policy interventions support global emissions 
trade. Taking a leading role in the global shift 
reductions. The UK is at the forefront 
to net zero presents a significant economic 
of measuring and publishing statistics 
opportunity for the UK. Estimates suggest 
of emissions generated overseas in the 
the UK’s low carbon economy could deliver 
production of goods and services consumed 
up to £170 billion of export sales of goods 
by UK residents. We recognise there is much 
and services by 2030.69 The UK will seek 
more to do on consumption emissions globally 
to improve market access for green goods 
which is why we are urging and supporting 
and services through our trade policy, our 
other countries to raise ambition on climate 
growing array of free trade agreements (FTAs) 
change, including on effectively pricing 
and our seat at the World Trade Organization 
carbon, as well as considering this issue as we 
(WTO). For example, when we exited the EU, 
negotiate new FTAs.
we unilaterally removed tariffs on over 100 
additional products used in renewable energy  36. Decisions on the liberalisation of partners 
generation, energy efficiency, carbon capture,  goods must account for their environmental 
and the circular economy as part of the UK’s  and climate impact. Where there is evidence 
Global Tariff.70 that liberalisation could lead to significant 
carbon leakage the case for maintaining 
34. We will seek to reaffirm our commitment 
tariffs or pursuing conditional market access, 
to the Paris Agreement in all UK 
through clauses on standards or eco/carbon 
trade agreements and will ensure that they 
intensity, should be carefully considered.
preserve our regulatory autonomy to pursue 
our climate targets including our Carbon  37. We will publish a refreshed Export 
Budgets, enhanced 2030 NDC and 2050 net  Strategy by the end of 2021. The Strategy 
zero commitment. We will use our multilateral  will help deliver jobs and growth and 
fora to galvanise international partners to  maximise export opportunities for green 
adopt climate-ambitious trade policy, and  UK technologies and innovation. It will also 
to promote global trade rules that are aligned  support our transition to net zero, enabling 
to net zero and the Paris Agreement, for  the UK to take advantage of the window to 
example through the WTO committees and  boost UK competitiveness in key low carbon 
the new Trade and Environmental  technologies, services and systems. The 
Sustainability Structured Discussions. Strategy will also help developing countries 
mitigate and adapt to climate change and 
nature loss by reducing trade barriers to help 
them benefit from the green transition.
38. UK Export Finance is also expanding its 
suite of green products and published the UK 
Export Finance Climate Change Strategy in 
September 2021. The UK is also one of the 
founding signatories of the Export Finance for 
Future initiative, a coalition of countries which 
endorsed a statement of principles to better 
integrate climate in export finance.
296Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
Finance put in place the conditions for a sustainable 
recovery and climate action, creating the 
39. At COP26 the UK is working to 
right investment environments and aligning 
achieve the finance goal, agreed in Article 
national budgets and planning processes with 
2.1.c of the Paris Agreement, to make 
the goals of the Paris Agreement and 2030 
finance flows consistent with a pathway 
Sustainable Development Agenda.
towards low greenhouse gas emissions 
and climate-resilient development. The UK  41. However, international public finance 
Presidency published our Priorities for Public  alone will never be enough to achieve the 
Finance earlier in 2021, and Priorities for  trillions of investment needed and put the 
Private Finance in 2020.71 world on a sustainable footing; the private 
sector will be key. Achieving net zero and 
40. Following COP26, the UK will continue 
our finance goals requires changes from the 
to strive for greater ambition on finance. 
whole economy – we need every company, 
Achieving the global transition requires 
bank, insurer, and investor to adjust their 
renewed action from all stakeholders to 
business models, develop credible plans for 
support the needs of developing countries. 
the transition and implement them. 
From the global to the local level, we need to 
UK global climate action beyond COP26
42. Beyond our COP26 and G7 Presidencies,  It will also establish a common vision and clear 
and the commitments outlined in this chapter,  priorities to guide UK international climate 
the UK will continue championing the fight  and nature action over the next decade. The 
against climate change and biodiversity  UK will continue to play a leadership role in 
loss internationally and at home in the  delivering the change needed by capitalising 
decade to come. on our areas of strengths including diplomacy, 
finance, science, technology and innovation, 
43. The UK COP26 Presidency will formally 
trade, and domestic leadership.
begin at the Summit in November 2021 
and run until COP27 in November 2022.  45. On top of the 2030 Strategic 
Throughout our Presidency year, we will build  Framework, we will aim to mobilise greater 
on the outcomes from COP26 and the COP26  finance for nature, tackle the key drivers 
campaigns, including further strengthening the  of biodiversity loss, and deliver against the 
architecture for collaboration in key sectors,  targets contained in the post-2020 Global 
and work with international partners to keep  Biodiversity Framework.
the 1.5°C temperature goal alive. This entails 
46. The upcoming International Climate 
continuing to advocate for our four Presidency 
Finance Strategy will set out how we will use 
goals with a focus on progress against our 
our £11.6 billion ICF to deliver transformational 
agreed targets in critical sectors and building 
programmes in support of mitigation and 
the conditions for further ambition and a 
adaptation action in developing countries 
successful Global Stocktake in 2023.
across the four themes of clean energy, 
44. Building on our COP26 Presidency, we  nature, resilience, and infrastructure.
are developing a 2030 Strategic Framework 
due to be published in 2022. The Framework 
will provide a coordinated approach to 
deliver against the climate and biodiversity 
commitments set out in the Integrated Review. 
297Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Endnotes
1  Mission Innovation is a global initiative of 24 countries, including the UK and the European 
Commission, working to accelerate clean energy innovation. It was established in 2015.
2  BEIS (2020), ‘The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/the-ten-point-plan-for-a-green-industrial-revolution
3  This includes legacy funding from government’s previous £505 million Energy Innovation 
Programme.
4  We recently published a Fusion Strategy and a Fusion Regulation Green Paper, recognising 
that fusion could be the ultimate clean power solution, representing a low carbon, safe, 
continuous and effectively unlimited source of energy. BEIS (2021), ‘Towards fusion energy: 
the UK government’s fusion strategy’, https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/towards-
fusion-energy-proposals-for-a-regulatory-framework; BEIS (2021), ‘Towards fusion energy: 
proposals for a regulatory framework’ https://www.gov.uk/government/consultations/towards-
fusion-energy-proposals-for-a-regulatory-framework.
5  BEIS analysis based on the methodology used in the Energy Innovation Needs Assessments. 
BEIS (2019), ‘Energy Innovation Needs Assessments’.
6  The Industrial Strategy Challenge Fund (ISCF) aims to bring together our world-leading 
research base with Britain’s best businesses to address the biggest challenges society faces, 
including clean growth. The fund, which is part of government’s £4.7 billion investment in R&D 
over 4 years is delivered by UK Research and Innovation (UKRI) and its partners.
7  Bank of England (2021), ‘A roadmap for increasing productive finance investment’, https://
www.bankofengland.co.uk/report/2021/a-roadmap-for-increasing-productive-finance-
investment
8  Major projects are defined as those which: require spending over and above departmental 
expenditure limits; require primary legislation; and are innovative or contentious. More 
information can be found at https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/major-projects-authority
9  This diagram is not an entirely accurate representation of the stages of development at which 
these institutions and funds intervene and it is simplification of the varied programmes and 
impacts they have on different sectors, businesses and technologies. However, it demonstrates 
roughly where these government interventions have greatest impact and have a key role to play 
in delivering economy-wide net zero solutions.
10  Mark Carney and the COP26 Private Finance Hub – in partnership with the UNFCCC Climate 
Actions Champions and the Race to Zero campaign and the COP26 Presidency- have 
launched a coalition that combines existing and new net zero finance initiatives into a wider 
strategic forum: The Glasgow Financial Alliance for Net Zero (GFANZ). GFANZ aims to raise 
ambition in the financial sector by allowing firms to demonstrate collective commitment to net 
zero.
11  BloombergNEF (2021), Database accessed 12/10/2021
298Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
12  This diagram is only an approximation of the maturity of different sectors to illustrate potential 
public sector interventions.
13  Defra, Environment Agency, Natural England (2021), ‘Innovative nature projects awarded 
funding to drive private investment’, https://www.gov.uk/government/news/innovative-nature-
projects-awarded-funding-to-drive-private-investment
14  BEIS (2020), ‘Government launches new £40m Clean Growth Fund to supercharge green 
start-ups’, [Press release] https://www.gov.uk/government/news/government-launches-new-
40-million-clean-growth-fund-to-supercharge-green-start-ups
15  Chaired by Mark Carney, is bringing together over 160 firms from the leading net zero initiatives 
across the financial system to accelerate the transition to net zero emissions by 2050 at the 
latest.
16  Chancellor sets out how UK financial services can create prosperity at home and project values 
abroad in first Mansion House speech: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/chancellor-sets-
out-how-uk-financial-services-can-create-prosperity-at-home-and-project-values-abroad-in-
first-mansion-house-speech
17  BEIS (2019), ‘Green Finance Strategy’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/green-
finance-strategy
18  Chancellor sets out how UK financial services can create prosperity at home and project values 
abroad in first Mansion House speech: https://www.gov.uk/government/news/chancellor-sets-
out-how-uk-financial-services-can-create-prosperity-at-home-and-project-values-abroad-in-
first-mansion-house-speech
19  LSE Grantham Institute (2021), ‘Green economy: how the transition to net-zero could affect UK 
jobs across the country’, https://www.lse.ac.uk/granthaminstitute/news/green-economy-how-
the-transition-to-net-zero-could-affect-uk-jobs-across-the-country/ 
20  BEIS (2021), ‘Wind of change for the Humber region’, [Press release] https://www.gov.uk/
government/news/wind-of-change-for-the-humber-region 
21  The World Bank, Climate-Smart Mining: Minerals for Climate Action, https://www.worldbank.
org/en/topic/extractiveindustries/brief/climate-smart-mining-minerals-for-climate-action
22  BEIS (2020), ‘The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/the-ten-point-plan-for-a-green-industrial-revolution 
23  CITB (2021), ‘Building Skills for Net Zero’, https://www.citb.co.uk/about-citb/construction-
industry-research-reports/search-our-construction-industry-research-reports/building-skills-for-
net-zero/ 
24  Heat Pump Association (2020), ‘Building the Installer Base for Net Zero Heating’, https://www.
heatpumps.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/06/Building-the-Installer-Base-for-Net-Zero-
Heating_02.06.pdf
25  BEIS (2021), ‘Green Jobs Taskforce Report’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
green-jobs-taskforce-report]
26  Forestry Skills Forum (2021) ‘Forestry Workforce Research’, https://www.confor.org.uk/
media/2678188/forestry-workforce-research-final-report-august-2021.pdf
299Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
27  BEIS (2021), ‘Green Jobs Taskforce report’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
green-jobs-taskforce-report
28  BEIS (2021), ‘Green Jobs Taskforce report’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
green-jobs-taskforce-report
29  BEIS (2021), ‘Green Jobs Taskforce report’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
green-jobs-taskforce-report
30  Building back better and greener, BEACON, https://beaconwales.org/ 
31  Industrial Strategy Council (2019), ‘UK Skills Mismatch 2030 – research paper’, https://
industrialstrategycouncil.org/uk-skills-mismatch-2030-research-paper 
32  What Qualification Levels Mean, GOV.UK, https://www.gov.uk/what-different-qualification-
levels-mean/list-of-qualification-levels
33  BEIS (2021), ‘Green Jobs Taskforce report’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
green-jobs-taskforce-report
34  BEIS Analysis; NAEI (2021), ‘Greenhouse Gas Inventories for England, Scotland, 
Wales & Northern Ireland: 1990-2019’, “https://eur02.safelinks.protection.outlook.
com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fuk-air.defra.gov.uk%2Freports%2Fcat09%2F2106240841_
DA_GHGI_1990-2019_Final_Issue1.2.xlsx&data=04%7C01%7CCarys.Parkinson%40beis.
gov.uk%7C3fcede07e99f45792dde08d98d882921%7Ccbac700502c143ebb497e6492d1
b2dd8%7C0%7C0%7C637696438200726854%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWI-
joiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJQIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C1000&sda-
ta=OjdCXYKW2%2FON40TzziyLmu6qxINXUeWV90NZOL60vyI%3D&reserved=0” https://
uk-air.defra.gov.uk/reports/cat09/2106240841_DA_GHGI_1990-2019_Final_Issue1.2.xlsx
35  ONS (2021), ‘Regional gross domestic product: all ITL regions’, 1998 - 2019, “https://
eur02.safelinks.protection.outlook.com/?url=https%3A%2F%2Fwww.ons.gov.uk%2Fecon-
omy%2Fgrossdomesticproductgdp%2Fdatasets%2Fregionalgrossdomesticproductallnut-
slevelregions&data=04%7C01%7CCarys.Parkinson%40beis.gov.uk%7C3fcede07e99f-
45792dde08d98d882921%7Ccbac700502c143ebb497e6492d1b2dd8%7C0%7C0%
7C637696438200746767%7CUnknown%7CTWFpbGZsb3d8eyJWIjoiMC4wLjAwMDAiLCJ-
QIjoiV2luMzIiLCJBTiI6Ik1haWwiLCJXVCI6Mn0%3D%7C1000&sdata=xonO3pzT%2FBi81uXG-
8jQcG75pJSRS1Z5oSpyvzCLkDtE%3D&reserved=0” https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/gross-
domesticproductgdp/datasets/regionalgrossdomesticproductallnutslevelregions
36  CCC (2020), ‘Sixth Carbon Budget’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/sixth-carbon-
budget/
37  BEIS (2021), Final UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics. BEIS (2020), Updated 
energy and emissions projections: 2019.
38  Compared to 2018 baseline.
39  Where cycling activity is measured as the estimated total number of cycle stages made each 
year, from 0.8 billion stages in 2013 to 1.6 billion stages in 2025.
40  Where walking activity is measured as the total number of walking stages per person per year, 
to 300 stages per person per year in 2025
300Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
41  Collection Final UK Greenhouse gas emissions national statistics, BEIS, https://www.gov.uk/
government/collections/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics
42  Government Commercial Function, ‘Guide to using the Social Value Model’. 3 December 2020. 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/940827/Guide-to-using-the-Social-Value-Model-Edn-1.1-3-Dec-20.pdf
43  This analysis excludes the LULUCF sector, which is a net sink of emissions in most local 
authorities, however the proportion is not sensitive to this approach.
44  Provisional assessment of policies and proposals. Savings cover only aspects of the policy 
package where it has been possible to determine the likely local authority role.
45  Community Energy England (2021), ‘Community Energy State of the Sector 2021’,  
https://communityenergyengland.org/pages/state-of-the-sector
46  BEIS Public Attitudes Tracker: Wave 37 – Key Findings’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/beis-public-attitudes-tracker-wave-37 
47  BEIS Research Report Number: 2021/034, ‘Climate change and net zero: public awareness 
and perceptions’, Annex 1: data tables, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/climate-
change-and-net-zero-public-awareness-and-perceptions
48  BEIS (2021), ‘Net zero public dialogue’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/net-zero-
public-dialogue
49  Net Zero Societal Change Analysis Project, Energy Systems Catapult Research, June 2021
50  This draws on work commissioned by BEIS from the Behavioural Insights Team ‘Net zero: 
principles for successful behaviour change initiatives’, The Behavioural Insights Team. BIT 
conducted a rapid evidence review of relevant literature, compiled a total of 87 policy case 
studies from OECD countries and consulted with 10 experts from a range of behavioural and 
social sciences.
51  Smart metering statistics, Quarterly update June 2021, https://www.gov.uk/government/
collections/smart-meters-statistics
52  ONS, Provisional UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics 2020: https://www.gov.uk/
government/statistics/provisional-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-2020
53  BEIS W11 Kantar Attitudes Tracker, Jan 2021 (Question: % agree that as a business we have a 
responsibility to reduce our carbon emissions to tackle climate change)
54  The 68% excludes International Aviation and Shipping
55  IPCC (2018), ‘Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5C’, https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
56  PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (2020), ‘Trends in global CO  and total 
2
greenhouse gas emissions’, https://www.pbl.nl/en/trends-in-global-co2-emissions
57  PBL Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (2020), ‘Trends in global CO2 and total 
greenhouse gas emissions’, https://www.pbl.nl/en/trends-in-global-co2-emissions
301Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
58  Cabinet Office (2021), ‘Global Britain in a Competitive Age: the Integrated Review of Security, 
Defence, Development and Foreign Policy’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
global-britain-in-a-competitive-age-the-integrated-review-of-security-defence-development-
and-foreign-policy
59  IEA (2021), ‘Global Energy Related CO  emissions in the net zero pathway and Low 
2
International Cooperation Case, 2010-2090’, https://www.iea.org/data-and-statistics/
charts/global-energy-related-co2-emissions-in-the-net-zero-pathway-and-low-international-
cooperation-case-2010-2090
60  Rocky Mountain Institution (2019), ‘Seven Challenges for Energy Transformation’, https://rmi.
org/seven-challenges-report/
61  BEIS (2020), ‘The UK’s Nationally Determined Contribution under the Paris Agreement’, 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-uks-nationally-determined-contribution-
communication-to-the-unfccc. The 68% excludes International Aviation and Shipping.
62  Prime Minister’s Office, 10 Downing Street (2021), ‘Prime Minister commits £3bn UK climate 
finance to supporting nature’ [Press release], https://www.gov.uk/government/news/prime-
minister-commits-3bn-uk-climate-finance-to-supporting-nature
63  FCDO (2021), ‘UK Climate Finance results 2021’, [Corporate report] https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/uk-climate-finance-results-2021
64  BEIS (2021), ‘BEIS Equality Objectives’, [Corporate report], https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/beis-equality-objectives
65  BEIS (2021), ‘BEIS Equality Objectives’, [Corporate report], https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/beis-equality-objectives
66  UN Environnent Programme (2020), ‘Emissions Gap Report 2020’, https://www.unep.org/
interactive/emissions-gap-report/2020/
67  UN Environment Programme (2020), ‘Emissions Gap Report 2020’, https://www.unep.org/
interactive/emissions-gap-report/2020/
68  International Renewable Energy Agency (2021), ‘Majority of New Renewables Undercut 
Cheapest Fossil Fuel on Cost’, [Press release], https://www.irena.org/newsroom/
pressreleases/2021/Jun/Majority-of-New-Renewables-Undercut-Cheapest-Fossil-Fuel-on-Cost
69  CCC (2017), ‘UK business opportunities of moving to a low-carbon economy’, HYPERLINK 
“http://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/uk-energy-prices-and-bills-2017-report-supporting-
research/” www.theccc.org.uk/publication/uk-energy-prices-and-bills-2017-report-supporting-
research/
70  DIT (2020), ‘UK Global Tariff backs UK businesses and consumers’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/news/uk-global-tariff-backs-uk-businesses-and-consumers
71  Mark Carney, UN Special Envoy for Climate Action and Finance and the Prime Minister’s 
Finance Adviser for COP26 (2021), ‘Priorities for Private Finance for COP26’, https://ukcop26.
org/wp-content/uploads/2020/11/COP26-Private-Finance-Hub-Strategy_Nov-2020v4.1.pdf
302Chapter 4 – Supporting the Transition across the Economy
303Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Technical 
Annex305Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Technical Annex
UK carbon budgets and international emissions targets 
Climate Change Act Legislated carbon budgets
1. Parliament passed the Climate Change  5. Six carbon budgets have been set to date, 
Act1 (the Act) in 2008, establishing the UK’s  covering 2008 to 2037. The sixth carbon 
2050 target and the supporting framework  budget, the first to be decided under the UK’s 
of carbon budgets. The Act also established  new net zero target, was set in June 2021. 
the Committee on Climate Change, now  The UK has already met, and overachieved, 
the Climate Change Committee (CCC), an  its first (2008-2012) and second (2013-2017) 
independent statutory body, to advise the  carbon budgets, and is on track to meet its 
Government and the Devolved Administrations  current third (2018-2022) carbon budget.4
on setting and meeting carbon budgets. The 
6. To show how we will meet our climate 
CCC advises on the level of each budget, the 
targets, including legislated carbon budgets up 
respective contributions that different sectors 
to and including the sixth carbon budget, the 
could make and the extent to which carbon 
Net Zero Strategy contains both an indicative 
budgets could be met through the use of 
delivery pathway and illustrative 2050 net zero 
permitted “flexibilities” (such as surpluses from 
scenarios. The pathway, which stretches to 
previous carbon budgets or the purchase of 
the end of the Sixth Carbon Budget period 
good quality international carbon credits).
in 2037, provides an indicative trajectory of 
2. Under the Act, the UK was legally required  emissions reductions which we aim to achieve 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at  through the Strategy and through delivery of 
least 80 per cent by 2050 on 1990 levels.  the policies and proposals outlined. It therefore 
In 2019, on advice of the CCC2, the UK  indicates the timescales over which we expect 
committed to reaching net zero emissions by  those policies and proposals to take effect to 
2050 and consequently the target reduction in  deliver our targets. The pathway is designed 
the Act was increased to at least 100%.  to be broadly consistent with all three of 
the illustrative 2050 scenarios set out in the 
3. To keep the UK on a pathway to achieving 
Journey to Net Zero chapter of the Net Zero 
the 2050 target, the Government is obliged to 
Strategy. There is uncertainty associated with 
set legally binding, five-year caps on emissions 
our decarbonisation pathway through to 2037 
– carbon budgets – twelve years in advance 
and the 2050 scenarios – the exact path we 
and then to publish a report setting out 
take to meet our climate targets is likely to 
policies and proposals for meeting that budget 
differ and must respond flexibly to changes 
and those budgets previously set. 
that arise over time. 
4. The Net Zero Strategy is the means by 
which we satisfy the requirements of the Act in 
relation to policies and proposals for meeting 
the current carbon budgets.3
306 Technical Annex
International emissions targets  9. The UK will therefore need to overachieve 
on the fifth carbon budget to meet its 
7. The 2015 Paris Agreement5 under the UN 
international climate targets and stay on track 
established the goal of keeping the global 
for the sixth carbon budget. Accordingly, the 
mean temperature rise to well below 2°C, 
policies and proposals, delivery pathway, 
whilst pursuing efforts to limit the rise to under 
deployment assumptions and any other 
1.5°C. Under the Kigali amendment to the 
analysis presented in the Net Zero Strategy 
Montreal Protocol, the UK has also committed 
for the fifth carbon budget period are 
to reducing F-gas emissions by 85% on 2011-
consistent with the action required to meet the 
2013 levels by 2036.
UK’s 2030 NDC. 
8. Under the Paris Agreement, the UK 
10. The Net Zero Strategy also constitutes the 
announced its Nationally Determined 
UK’s updated Long-Term Low Greenhouse 
Contribution (NDC) in December 2020, which 
Gas Emission Development Strategy for the 
commits the UK to reduce net greenhouse 
purposes of the Paris Agreement.
gas (GHG) emissions by at least 68% by 2030 
compared to 1990 reference year levels.6 
This represents an increase of ambition on 
the fifth carbon budget, which covers the 
years 2028-2032.
Accounting for UK emissions
The UK greenhouse gas inventory 12. The net carbon account also includes 
the UK’s net purchases/sales of international 
11. The UK’s performance against its 2050 
carbon units, if any. Carbon units include 
target and carbon budgets is assessed 
allowances issued under cap-and-trade 
through the UK’s net carbon account,7 
systems, and international carbon credits 
measured in tonnes of carbon dioxide 
issued under international schemes. While the 
equivalent (tCO e) The net carbon account 
2 . UK intends to meet its climate targets for each 
comprises GHG emissions from the UK net 
of carbon budgets 3 to 6 through reducing 
of emissions which are captured and stored 
emissions domestically and the proposals 
from land use, land-use change and forestry 
and policies set out in this Strategy have 
(LULUCF). The UK greenhouse gas inventory8 
been prepared on that basis, it reserves the 
is the basis for calculating the UK’s domestic 
right to use such voluntary cooperation under 
greenhouse gas emissions. Performance 
Article 6 of the Paris Agreement. This could 
against a carbon budget is assessed against 
occur through linking the UK ETS to another 
the earliest GHG inventory that covers the 
emissions trading system, or through the 
whole of the carbon budget period, which is 
use of international emissions reductions or 
published two years after the carbon budget 
removals units.
period in question ends. For example, the 
sixth carbon budget will be assessed in 2039 
based on the 1990-2037 GHG inventory. 
307Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
13. The net carbon account for each  International aviation and shipping
budget is calculated according to rules set 
16. The sixth carbon budget is the first that 
in Carbon Accounting Regulations.9 The 
will include international aviation and shipping 
accounting regulations that apply to each of 
(IAS) emissions. Previous budgets have not 
the carbon budgets may not be in place until 
included IAS emissions but were set such 
after the carbon budget periods are over, so 
that headroom for IAS emissions was left. We 
assumptions are required on what accounting 
have used bunker fuel sales to calculate IAS 
rules will apply. Some key assumptions are 
emissions for the sixth carbon budget. Under 
outlined in the remainder of this section. 
this method, IAS emissions are estimated from 
14. The international science behind  the amount of refuelling from bunkers at UK 
measuring emissions is continually evolving  airports and ports, whether by UK or non-UK 
and the assumptions made here do not  operators, for onward international journeys.
preclude future decisions on emissions 
Global warming potentials
accounting at both the domestic and 
international level. If future accounting 
17. Emissions of each greenhouse gas 
decisions turn out to differ from the 
(carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, 
assumptions made here, this would not 
fluorinated gases) are expressed in terms of 
automatically lead to a change in the budget 
carbon dioxide equivalent (CO e), recognising 
levels. The Climate Change Act allows  2
the different global warming potentials (GWP) 
for legislated carbon budget levels to be 
of the different gases.
amended if the government believes that, 
since the budget level was originally set, there  18. The UK greenhouse gas inventory 
have been significant changes affecting the  currently uses 100-year GWPs published 
basis on which the previous decision was  in the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report 
made. Where such changes happen but no  (AR4).12 However, it was agreed by the 
reset occurs, significant policy changes may  international community that GHG emissions 
be needed to meet the carbon budget. would be reported under the Paris Agreement 
transparency framework using an updated 
Peatland emissions
set of 100-year GWPs from the IPCC’s Fifth 
Assessment Report (AR5).13, 14 Two sets 
15. Emissions from peatlands were only 
of values for 100-year AR5 GWPs were 
partially captured in the UK GHG inventory 
published (with and without climate-carbon 
when the first five carbon budgets were 
feedbacks, which reflect more indirect effects 
set. A major revision to the inventory was 
of GHG emissions on the climate system 
implemented in February 2021 for the 1990-
- included in their methodologies) and it is 
2019 inventory10 to represent these emissions 
not yet clear which will be used. Therefore, 
with methodologies consistent with the IPCC 
to ensure that carbon budgets can still be 
Wetlands Supplement11, which will count 
met under either methodology, emissions 
towards all current and future carbon budgets. 
pathways in the main body of the Net Zero 
All analysis in this document includes peatland 
Strategy are based on the higher AR5 GWPs 
emissions in line with the updated inventory. 
with feedback methodology (consistent with 
This revision increased estimated emissions in 
the approach taken in setting the sixth carbon 
2019 by approximately 16 MtCO e relative to 
2
budget). However, this does not preclude any 
the methods used in the previous inventory.
future decisions on which methodology will be 
used, and emissions pathways based on AR5 
GWPs without feedback are also presented in 
this technical annex. 
308 Technical Annex
19. The use of AR5 GWPs without feedback  The UK Emissions Trading 
results in a lower CO -equivalent value for UK  Scheme (ETS)
2
GHG emissions compared to AR5 GWPs with 
feedback, meaning that less abatement would  21.  Calculations of carbon emissions by 
be required to meet the same carbon budget.  HMG historically followed a net accounting 
As a result, it may appear that the policies  framework16 that constructed the total 
and proposals in this strategy overachieve  carbon budget as a sum of two individual 
on our carbon budgets when based on AR5  components: i) emissions covered by the EU 
GWPs without feedback. However, these  Emissions Trading System (ETS), known as 
provide additional headroom with which  traded sector emissions (around one third of 
the Government could seek to manage  all UK emissions); and ii) emissions outside 
uncertainty in emissions projections. We would  the EU ETS known as non-traded sector 
review the cost effectiveness of maintaining  emissions. When the UK was part of the EU 
this headroom as the necessary policies and  ETS, the UK share of EU ETS allowances was 
proposals are implemented. Conversely, since  used to calculate traded sector emissions, 
the 2030 NDC is a percentage-based target  and emissions in the non-traded sector were 
and the base year to which that percentage  measured as actually emitted. The sum of 
relates comprises disproportionately high  these was the net carbon account. 
non-CO  emissions, slightly more abatement 
2 22. Now that the UK is no longer participating 
is actually required to meet the NDC under the 
in the EU ETS, UK operators are not trading 
lower AR5 GWPs without feedback compared 
emissions allowances with operators outside 
to AR5 GWPs with feedback.
the UK. The new UK ETS came into operation 
20. The Working Group I Contribution to the  on 1 January 2021, and it is only currently 
IPCC’s Sixth Assessment Report (AR6)15 was  necessary to count emissions within the 
published in August 2021, which included  UK territory towards carbon budgets. We 
updated estimates of 100-year AR6 GWPs.  assume that all years from 2021 onwards will 
However, it is not yet certain if or when these  be accounted on this basis. If the UK ETS 
will be used for GHG emissions reporting  were later linked with another ETS it may be 
under the UNFCCC or Paris Agreement. UK  decided that an adjustment needs to be made 
GHG emissions based on AR6 GWPs would  to account for any trading of allowances.17
be closer to UK emissions based on AR5 
The UK’s 2030 Nationally Determined 
GWPs without feedback than based on AR5 
Contribution
GWPs with feedback.
23. Accounting for the UK’s nationally 
determined contribution is different from that 
for carbon budgets. In particular, the NDC is 
a fixed percentage-based target. This means 
that any changes to the inventory in the 
baseline year will change the level of effort 
required to meet the NDC, while the carbon 
budgets are fixed targets in MtCO e.
2
Accounting for UK climate targets
24. The above assumptions are summarised 
in Table 1, alongside the coverage and level of 
the UK’s climate targets.
309Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Table 1: Accounting basis of UK climate targets
Carbon  Carbon  Carbon  Carbon 
Budget 3 Budget 4 Budget 5 NDC Budget 6
Years 2018-2022 2023-2027 2028-2032 2030 2033-2037
MtCO e limit  2,544  1,950  1,725  % based target  965 
2
(annual  (509) (390) (345) (estimated   (193)
equivalent) 262-275*)
Accounting   Traded/ non- Territorial UK  Territorial UK  Territorial UK  Territorial UK 
basis traded split for  emissions emissions emissions emissions
2018-2020 
Territorial for 
2021-22
International  Excluded Excluded Excluded Excluded Included
Aviation and 
Shipping (IAS)
Base year  859.6 859.6 859.6 TBC***  883.3****
(1990)** 
(859.6)
emissions
Percentage  41% 55% 60% 68% 78%
reduction on 
1990 (implied 
for carbon 
budgets)*****
*The range of emissions required to meet the NDC reflects uncertainty over whether AR5 with or without feedback 
GWPs are used. Uncertainty over baseline emissions in the 1990-2030 GHG inventory means the actual limit may lie 
outside this range.
**Base year emissions are calculated as emissions of CO , N O and CH  in 1990, and fluorinated gases in 1995.
2 2 4
***The baseline for the NDC will be determined by the GHG inventory 1990-2030, meaning that the abatement 
required to meet the NDC is dependent on future estimates of baseline emissions. Our estimate of that abatement is 
based on the UK 1990-2019 GHG inventory.
****The baseline for the sixth carbon budget includes 23.7 MtCO e for IAS, based on bunker fuel sales.
2
*****Estimates of historic UK GHG emissions are revised annually to incorporate methodological improvements, 
updated data and changes to international guidelines. The percentage reductions implied by CB levels are therefore 
subject to change.
310 Technical Annex
Baseline emissions projections 26. In some sectors, adjustments to the 
EEP 2019 reference case,19 published in 
25. While the GHG inventory is the source 
October 2020, have been made to reflect 
for historical emissions data, a combination 
developments in the evidence base since 
of sector modelling and the BEIS Energy 
publication and to tailor it to ensure it is 
and Emissions Projections (EEP)18 are used 
suitable as a baseline for the Net Zero 
to project future emissions. This section 
Strategy. The adjusted EEP, referred to as 
sets out the assumptions about the baseline 
the “baseline”, incorporates the Office for 
used for the purpose of this analysis. These 
Budget Responsibility’s (OBR) central forecast 
projections determine baseline emissions 
of economic growth available in July 2020.20 
for the indicative delivery pathway, based on 
The baseline also includes some planned 
policies implemented, adopted, or planned 
methodological improvements and corrections 
as of August 2019, and thus the further 
brought forward from the forthcoming EEP 
total emissions savings required to meet 
2020, but no updates to policies beyond 
the carbon budgets. The baseline does 
those included in EEP 2019. Table 2 provides 
not include policies announced in the Ten 
details of these changes, and Figure 1 
Point Plan, Energy White Paper, Transport 
compares the differences across the series. 
Decarbonisation Plan, or the Industrial 
The uncertainty range is explained further in 
Decarbonisation Strategy.
paragraphs 45-48.21
Figure 1: Net Zero Strategy baseline compared to EEP 201922
550
500
450
e
2
O
C
t
M
400
350
300
2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037
Uncertainty (NZS) Adjusted EEP19 NZS Baseline (incl. IAS)
311Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
27. In accordance with the accounting rules  with accounting assumptions for the 
represented in Table 1, all baselines are  relevant carbon budget.
adjusted where relevant to be consistent 
Table 2: Differences between Net Zero Strategy baseline and EEP 2019 
reference case
Impact on total 
Change between EEP 2019 and Net Zero  CB6 emissions, 
Sector  Strategy baseline  2033-37 (MtCO e) 
2
All  Update of economic growth projections to the latest available OBR  -42 
forecasts as of July 2020.
All Conversion of GHGs to CO e using Global Warming Potentials from  +75
2
AR5 with feedback compared to AR4 in EEP 2019.
Buildings Improvement of energy demand projections for domestic buildings.  -35 
EEP 2019 did not fully account for technology improvements in 
new build dwellings beyond those directly attributable to Building 
Regulations.
Buildings,  Improvement to the methodology for alignment with UK Greenhouse  Negligible net impact. 
Industry and  Gas Inventory estimates for mobile machinery and other oil 
Agriculture  emissions. This results in lower emissions in agriculture and buildings, 
and higher emissions in industry. 
Buildings  Inclusion of estimates of short-term behaviour change in 2020 on  Impact limited to 2020-
energy demand in public buildings.  2021. 
Buildings  Inclusion of estimates of short-term behaviour change in 2020 on  Impact limited to 2020-
energy demand in domestic buildings.  2021. 
Industry  Improvement of energy demand projection methodology for  +38
chemicals and construction industry subsectors. 
Industry  Alignment of projections of emissions from refineries with the Net  -22 
Zero Industrial Pathways model to reflect the impact of UK and global 
decarbonisation under a net zero consistent world scenario. 
Fuel supply  Alignment of projections for offshore oil and gas with projections from  -42
the Oil and Gas Authority (OGA). 
Power Power sector evidence base has been updated to latest data  -9
available. This includes a revision to Energy from Waste (EfW) 
emissions where EEP2019 underestimated these due to an error in 
the percentage of EfW that is renewable. In addition, some policies 
included in EEP2019 have been removed as these are considered 
to be pre-Energy White Paper, in particular further Nuclear beyond 
HPC, and building one Gas CCS plant. Offshore Wind capacity is 
15 GW higher in 2035 than in EEP2019 as further CfD auctions 
and planning means more capacity is on track to be built. There is 
also more large solar capacity building due to lower costs for this 
technology in up to date evidence.
312 Technical Annex
Impact on total 
Change between EEP 2019 and Net Zero  CB6 emissions, 
Sector  Strategy baseline  2033-37 (MtCO e) 
2
Transport  Inclusion of estimates of short-term behaviour change in 2020 in  Impact limited to  
road transport and domestic aviation.  2020-2021. 
Transport  Correction of a calibration error in EEP 2019 which led to an  +14 
underestimation of the amount of oil in the historic fuel mix for 
transport.
Transport  Closer alignment of national navigation and fishing emissions  +<5 
estimates with research commissioned by the Department for 
Transport.
International  Inclusion of estimates of short-term behaviour change in 2020 on  Impact limited to 2020-
Aviation and  international aviation.  2021. 
Shipping 
International  Closer alignment of international shipping estimates with research  +7 
Aviation and  commissioned by the Department for Transport.
Shipping 
28. There is ongoing uncertainty over how  Sector definitions
the COVID-19 pandemic will affect emissions 
in the long term. In 2020, emissions fell,23  29. The precise definition of the sectors used 
by the Net Zero Strategy, marked against 
but it is not yet clear what the effect will be 
IPCC categories, is published separately to 
on future emissions. We have assumed that 
this document.25 A summary of the coverage 
there is no long-term behavioural change due 
of each sector is shown in Table 3. Where 
to the pandemic. However, as stated above, 
sector chapters cover more than one of these 
the baseline is adjusted for the reduction 
sectors, the below table shows which sectors 
in economic growth and the short-term 
are covered by which chapter.
behaviour changes occurring due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. 24
313Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Table 3: Net Zero Strategy sector definitions
Sector 
NZS Sector chapter Sector definition
Power Power Emissions from power stations (Major Power Producers only), including 
those generating energy from waste.
Fuel Supply Fuel Supply and  Emissions from the extraction, processing, and production of fuels 
Hydrogen (chiefly oil, coal, gas and hydrogen).
Industry Industry Emissions from industrial processes, manufacturing, and production, 
including fuel combustion and product use in industrial buildings, as 
well as emissions from refineries and construction machinery. Includes 
emissions from non-Major Power Producers auto-generation and 
Combined Heat and Power.
Heat and  Heat and  Emissions from public, commercial, and residential buildings, including 
Buildings Buildings domestic product use such as garden machinery and composting. 
Domestic  Transport Emissions from all forms of road and rail transport, domestic aviation and 
Transport domestic shipping (including fishing vessels).
International  Emissions from fuel used in international aviation and international 
Aviation and  shipping, as measured by UK bunker fuel.
Shipping
Agriculture Natural  Covers emissions from livestock, crop soils and agricultural machinery.
Resources, Waste 
Forestry and  and F- Gases Emissions and removals from land use change, forestry, peatlands and 
Other Land Use other carbon stock change from land use (e.g. in the biomass pool). 
Resources and  Emissions from the treatment and disposal of solid and liquid waste and 
Waste  landfill, including emissions from incineration not used to generate energy 
(e.g. incineration of chemical waste).
Fluorinated  Fluorinated gas emissions, primarily from refrigeration, air-conditioning, 
Gases (F-gases) heat pumps, aerosols, and high voltage switchgear.
Greenhouse  Greenhouse Gas  Negative emissions from engineered removal technologies, including 
Gas Removals Removals direct air and bio-energy carbon capture and storage. 
314 Technical Annex
Illustrative 2050 net zero scenarios
30. The Net Zero Strategy explores three  Overview of the methodology used 
possible net zero scenarios in 2050 in chapter 
to develop the 2050 scenarios
2, building on the pathways developed for 
the sixth carbon budget Impact Assessment.  33. The net zero scenario modelling primarily 
These have been deliberately selected to  uses the UK TIMES Model (UKTM), a least-
illustrate a wide range of outcomes for the  cost, optimisation model covering all UK 
economy that are possible by 2050. However,  emissions (including land use) and the UK 
different outcomes within this range or beyond  energy system over the period 2010 to 2060.27 
this range are also possible.  The model includes assumptions about 
technology costs, availability, performance, 
31. This analysis has primarily two objectives: 
and build rates.28 It also includes assumptions 
for future fossil fuel prices and energy services 
a.  First, to examine three different scenarios 
demand by end-use sector. These inputs are 
of economy-wide decarbonisation to 
pre-determined for each model run and do 
understand the range of possible long-
not vary with deployment. Based on the input 
term outcomes and therefore inform the 
assumptions, the model identifies the least-
short-term delivery pathways. Through 
cost way of meeting a given GHG reduction 
previous modelling and research, BEIS 
trajectory while also meeting assumed 
has identified three areas of technology 
end-use demand for energy services. 
and resource uncertainty likely to have a 
Further information on the methodology and 
substantial impact on the 2050 energy 
assumptions used in the UK TIMES model 
system.26 The scenarios have been 
can be found in Annex A.2 of the sixth carbon 
developed in consultation with internal 
budget impact assessment.29
experts to illustrate feasible avenues to 
achieving net zero emissions based on:
34. An extensive exercise has been 
undertaken to ensure UKTM is aligned with 
•  The relative role of electrification and 
the latest evidence base and assumptions 
hydrogen in fuel switching;
used across government. Where this was not 
•  The role of land-use and bioenergy to 
possible, off-model adjustments have been 
produce negative emissions; and
made to the net zero scenarios.
•  The role of further innovations to 
35. A particular advantage of UKTM is 
address the hardest to abate sectors 
that it identifies the least-cost technology 
of the economy.
pathway for a given set of assumptions, 
b.  Second, it confirms that all three scenarios  taking account of interactions across energy 
are consistent with the policies and  supply and end-use sectors over time. The 
proposals set out in the Strategy to meet  model is therefore useful for identifying which 
the sixth carbon budget. technologies could be essential or important 
in the long run for achieving a low cost, 
32. This section explains the methodology 
net zero consistent energy system. It also 
that was used for this analysis and 
helps identify the appropriate sequencing of 
summarises the differences between the 
abatement opportunities.
three scenarios. It also shows illustrative 
sectoral emissions in 2050 and accompanying 
deployment characteristics. 
315Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
36. However, there are a number of limitations  37. The three scenarios are 
to the modelling: summarised below:
•  The model does not directly take  •  High electrification: explores the impact 
account of uncertainty of any kind over  of using widespread electrification to 
future technology costs and availability.  support transport, heating, and industry 
Uncertainty is only displayed through  decarbonisation coupled with deep 
the range of outputs given by the  decarbonisation of electricity supply.
different scenarios.
•  High resource: explores the impact 
•  Technology cost reductions over  of using low-carbon hydrogen more 
time are based on fixed assumptions  extensively, particularly for decarbonising 
and do not directly account for cost  buildings and heavy vehicles. It assumes 
reductions through widescale deployment  higher levels of tree-planting are 
in the model. i.e. costs are not a  achievable, increasing the ‘negative 
function of deployment. emissions’ available from land-use sinks.
•  No additional barriers beside cost and  •  High innovation: explores a world in 
technical build rates are considered,  which successful innovations, such as 
no potential industrial benefits from  synthetic fuels and zero emission aircraft, 
developing and deploying new low-carbon  enable lower residual emissions to be 
technologies are considered. Modelling  reached sooner in aviation. Higher capture 
does not consider any upside or downside  rates – above baseline assumptions – 
risks to the economy arising from  increase the impact of carbon capture 
the transition. technologies, particularly higher 
deployment of direct air capture.
•  Behavioural or other practical 
considerations that might make certain 
pathways more or less expensive to 
achieve are not accounted for (other 
than where they are reflected in costs 
or build rates).
•  The model varies in detail by sector. In 
some areas only high-level representations 
are provided and the model is not spatially 
disaggregated. 
316 Technical Annex
38. The scenarios were constructed in the  39. Other assumptions were kept the same 
UKTM by varying input assumptions for: across the scenarios. For instance, projections 
of final demand for end-use sectors are 
•  The extent to which technologies can 
consistent with those used in the central 
be rolled out. For example, in the high 
2037 delivery pathway and are the same 
electrification scenario 100% of buildings 
for each of the modelled 2050 scenarios. 
are set to be heated by electricity in 2050, 
Technology and resource cost assumptions, 
whereas in the high resource scenario heat 
including fossil fuel prices, are also the same 
pump deployment is constrained and this 
across each scenario. Sensitivity analysis 
figure drops to 40%.
conducted as part of the sixth carbon budget 
•  Availability of resources and technologies.  Impact Assessment showed that the impact 
For example, in the high resource scenario,  of economic growth and fossil fuel prices on 
we assume 50kha afforestation per annum  the technology mix in 2050 is relatively small, 
by 2050 (compared to 30kha in the other  therefore these effects were not considered 
scenarios). Higher efficiency capture  further.30 Finally, sector emissions to 2037 
technologies are only available in the high  were aligned to those in the delivery pathway 
innovation scenarios (for example CCUS  described in the Strategy. For further key 
capture rates of 99% compared to 95% in  assumptions by sector see the evidence base 
most cases in the other scenarios).  section of this annex. 
•  For sectors such as industry and aviation, 
40. Table 4 shows the level of emissions in 
where the UKTM does not represent the 
2050 implied by each of the three illustrative 
full range of known abatement options, 
scenarios. All scenarios meet net zero in 2050, 
supplementary adjustments to emissions, 
with removals technologies compensating for 
energy demand, and key deployment 
any residual emissions.
requirements have been made. These have 
been taken into account in the optimisation 
of other sectors via the specification of the 
emission targets. 
317Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Table 4: Illustrative total territorial emissions under the different scenarios
2050 illustrative emissions (MtCO e)
2
2019 emissions  High  High 
Sectors (MtCO e) electrification High resource innovation
2
Power 58 3 2 1
Industry 78 3 3 10
Fuel Supply 26 0 5 8
Heat and Buildings 88 0 0 2
Domestic  122 3 4 5
Transport
International  45 35 35 21
Aviation and 
Shipping
Agriculture and  63 20 14 21
LULUCF
Waste and F-gases 40 12 13 13
Greenhouse Gas  0 -75 -76 -81
Removals
Total emissions 520 0 0 0
41. Given the long-term scientific uncertainty  Characteristics of the 2050 scenarios
and to err on the side of caution, the analysis 
42. To illustrate the assumptions 
above assumes AR5 with feedback GWPs. 
underpinning the 2050 scenarios, Table 5 
On the basis of AR5 without feedback GWPs 
shows deployment characteristics for each 
the scenarios would reach c.-9 MtCO e in 
2
sector. These are illustrative of the levels of 
2050 as a result of primarily lower emissions 
deployment required for each of the three 
from methane. This uncertainty represents less 
scenarios. Not all technology deployment 
than 2% of the overall abatement requirement. 
required to meet net zero is represented. 
Because of this, detailed sensitivity analysis 
on GWPs has not been carried out for the 
purposes of this strategy. However, lower 
GWPs could allow less reliance on removals 
in 2050 thereby lowering the requirements for 
sustainable biomass, or alternatively slightly 
higher end-use sector emissions. 
318 Technical Annex
Table 5: Illustrative characteristics in 2050
2050 
illustrative 
Sector Deployment assumptions Unit 2019 range
Power Electricity generation TWh 320 610-690
Low carbon GB generation as a percentage of  % 56% 99-100%
total projected generation 
Industry Low carbon fuel switching* TWh 110 190-210
Resource and energy efficiency savings MtCO e 0 13
2
Industry demand for industrial CCUS (not  MtCO e 0 6-9
2
including BECCS)
Fuel Supply Low carbon hydrogen production  TWh  0 240-500
Steam methane reformation with CCS (as a  % 0 0-75%
percentage of total hydrogen generation)
Electrolysis as a percentage of total hydrogen  % 0 15-75%
generation
Biomass gassification with CCS as a percentage  % 0 0-20%
of total hydrogen generation
Heat and  Cumulative heat pumps installed domestically Million  0.2 12-28
Buildings installations
Cumulative homes converted to 100% hydrogen  Million  0 0-14
homes
Demand reduction as a result of energy efficiency  % 0 15-20%
measures
Low carbon fuels* consumption as a percentage  % 62% 90-100%
of total fuel consumption in commercial buildings
Heat supplied via heat networks TWh 14 70
Biomethane injected into gird TWh 3 0-20
Agriculture  Total area of peatland under restoration kha  n/a 380
and 
LULUCF Yearly area of afforestation UK kha  13.6 30-50
Yearly area of perennial energy crop and short  kha  0 53
rotation forestry planted
Farmers engaging with low carbon farming  % 60% 100%
practices as a percentage of total farmers
Waste and  Level of HFC consumption relative to a 2015  % 63% 15%
F-gases baseline level
319Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
2050 
illustrative 
Sector Deployment assumptions Unit 2019 range
Greenhouse  BECCS (all technologies) MtCO e 0 52-58
2
Gas 
Removals DACCS MtCO e 0 18-29
2
Transport  ZEVs as a percentage of total car fleet % 0.3% 96-97%
and IAS
ZEVs as a percentage of total van fleet % 0.2% 88-90%
ZEVs as a percentage of total HGV fleet % 0% 95-97%
ZEVs as a percentage of total bus and coach  % 0.3% 91-95%
fleet
Low carbon fuels* use in road transport as a  % 5% 30-60%
percentage of total fuel use (in litres)
SAF use in domestic and international aviation as  % 0% 5-30%
a percentage of total fuel use (in tonnes)
Low carbon fuels use in domestic and  % 0% 97%
international shipping as a percentage of total 
fuel use (in TWh)
Overall GDP carbon intensity tCO e/  194 0
2
GDP 
£m2020
GDP energy intensity MWh/  700 270-310
GDP 
£m2020
*The table includes several deployment assumptions covering relevant low carbon fuels in different sectors. The low 
carbon fuels included are the following: electricity, biofuels, solid biomass, hydrogen, ammonia, and methanol. All 
these deployment assumptions include electricity and hydrogen both in the numerator and denominator, with the 
exception of low carbon fuels used in road transport (from which electricity and hydrogen are completely excluded). 
320 Technical Annex
Meeting the carbon budgets 
43. This section sets out historic performance  44. The UK has overperformed on its carbon 
against carbon budgets and future  budgets so far, by 37 Mt CO e for the first 
2
performance implied by the delivery pathway,  carbon budget and 384 Mt CO e for the 
2
including emissions broken down by sector  second carbon budget. Table 6 shows the 
for each future carbon budget. Deployment  current baseline projections for future carbon 
assumptions that illustrate some of the  budgets (reflecting policies as of August 
real-world changes required to meet carbon  2019),31 and also the overall pathway for 
budgets are also presented. emissions as set out in the Net Zero Strategy.
Table 6: Projected emissions implied by pathway against current and future 
carbon budgets
CB3 CB4 CB5 CB6 (incl. IAS)
Years covered 2018-2022 2023-2027 2028-2032 2033-2037
Baseline 2,499 2,052 1,889 2,029
Budget limit 2,544 1,950 1,725 965
NZS emissions  2,499 1,854 1,312 962
pathway
Performance  -45 -96 -413 -3
against carbon 
budget
Uncertainty over future emissions trends (such as GDP, and population size), 
uncertainty in the impacts of certain existing 
45. Table 7 shows an indicative annual range 
policies on emissions and uncertainty in the 
over the sixth carbon budget period.32 The 
current evidence base on emissions (such as 
lower and upper ranges are based on Monte 
land use emissions). It also uses regression 
Carlo analysis of the EEP, conducted in 2018 
residuals to account for structural modelling 
and assessed to represent the best evidence 
uncertainty in the EEP. The analysis does 
of the uncertainty in the projections for the 
not capture uncertainty in the policies and 
sixth carbon budget period.33 The analysis 
proposals brought forward under the Strategy.
reflects a 95% confidence interval around the 
baseline to reflect uncertainty in future macro 
321Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
46. Due to accounting changes, further  47. The pathway is highly ambitious meaning 
emissions have recently come in scope of the  there are downside risks to the estimated 
sixth carbon budget period. The Monte Carlo  policy savings (for example, delays to delivery), 
analysis has therefore been augmented to  as well as upside risks (for example, no 
include these emissions. The range around  long-run behavioural impacts are assumed 
historical emissions for international aviation  as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic). 
and shipping is estimated based on statistical  Government will monitor progress against 
volatility in historical emissions. Emissions  the pathway as set out in the Embedding net 
added following the adoption of the Wetlands  zero in Government chapter, and will prepare 
Supplement assume the uncertainty is  further proposals and policies to enable the 
proportional to the overall uncertainty in the  carbon budgets to be met as necessary.
LULUCF sector.34
Table 7: Provisional indicative range of the carbon account over the sixth 
carbon budget
2033 2034 2035 2036 2037
Upper 279 265 240 226 207
Central 232 215 190 171 153
Lower 193 177 150 131 112
48. Emissions across the period prior to the  50. Whilst the ranges below represent our 
sixth carbon budget are also uncertain: the  current assessment of the right trajectory 
Government will provide further analysis in  to meet our carbon budgets, developments 
future Energy and Emissions Projections. in climate science, accounting regulations, 
baseline emissions, technological progress 
Sectoral emissions over the 
and/or policy impacts may alter the expected 
carbon budgets impact of policies set out in the strategy, or 
the optimal distribution of policy effort across 
49. Table 8 shows an indicative emissions 
sectors. Future climate strategies will update 
pathway, broken down by sector across the 
this sectoral emissions pathway where 
fourth, fifth and sixth carbon budgets. The 
necessary using the latest evidence.
fifth carbon budget figures are aligned with 
the UK’s NDC, and 2030 values have been 
used for this column. To reflect uncertainty 
from macroeconomic trends and in underlying 
baseline emissions, emissions for each 
sector are shown as a range. These ranges 
are calibrated to the uncertainty range 
set out in the economy wide EEP Monte 
Carlo analysis.35
322 Technical Annex
Table 8: Sectoral emissions across the carbon budgets: MtCO e per year 
2
(using AR5 with feedback GWPs)
Current  CB4  NDC  CB6  
Sector (2019) (average 2023-27) (2030) (average 2033-37)
Agriculture and LULUCF 63 51 to 57 44 to 52 38 to 48
Buildings 88 73 to 82 55 to 66 34 to 47
Domestic Transport 122 100 to 111 67 to 80 29 to 43
Fuel Supply 26 18 to 20 14 to 16 10 to 12
Industry 78 58 to 65 36 to 45 19 to 29
Power 58 28 to 31 14 to 17 9 to 11
Waste and F-gases 40 24 to 27 17 to 20 12 to 15
Greenhouse Gas  0 0 to 0 -12 to -1 -33 to -11
Removals
Intl Aviation and  45 (42 to 46) (44 to 50) 39 to 46
Shipping*
Total (incl. IAS) 520 192
Total (excl. IAS) 476 371 262
*Figures in parentheses indicate that IAS is not counted towards that target
51. As set out above, there is some 
uncertainty which set of Global Warming 
Potentials the UK will adopt. We have 
therefore also translated these pathways 
using alternative AR5 without feedback 
GWPs, assuming it were optimal in cost- and 
non-cost terms to implement the same set of 
policies and proposals modelled in the AR5 
with feedback pathways.
323Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Table 9: Sectoral emissions across the carbon budgets: MtCO e per year 
2
(using AR5 without feedback GWPs)
Current  CB4  NDC  CB6 
Sector (2019) (average 2023-27) (average 2030) (average 2033-37)
Agriculture and LULUCF 54 43 to 48 37 to 44 31 to 39
Buildings 88 73 to 82 55 to 66 34 to 47
Domestic Transport 122 100 to 111 67 to 80 29 to 43
Fuel Supply 25 18 to 20 13 to 16 10 to 11
Industry 78 58 to 65 36 to 45 19 to 29
Power 58 28 to 31 14 to 17 9 to 11
Waste and F-gases 34 21 to 23 14 to 17 10 to 13
Greenhouse Gas  0 -1 to 0 -12 to -1 -33 to -11
Removals
Intl Aviation and  44 (42 to 46) (44 to 50) 39 to 46
Shipping*
Total incl. IAS 503     182
Total excl. IAS 458 359 251
* Figures in parentheses indicate that IAS is not counted towards that target36
Illustrative deployment assumptions  values differ between the electrification and 
hydrogen pathways set out in the strategy for 
to meet the carbon budgets
the heat and buildings sector. In some cases, 
52. To illustrate some of the deployment  these assumptions represent early-stage 
assumptions underpinning the emissions  assessments based on maximum technical 
pathway, Table 10 below shows real-world  potential. Given ongoing uncertainties, the 
deployment assumptions for each sector. Not  policy mix that will meet carbon budgets, and 
all of the policies and proposals underlying  related deployment assumptions, are subject 
the delivery pathway are represented by  to change; these are illustrative and should not 
these assumptions. Ranges indicate where  be interpreted as government targets.
324 Technical Annex
Table 10: Deployment assumptions underpinning pathway
Deployment 
Sector assumptions Unit 2019 2025 2030 2035
Power Electricity generation TWh 320 315 370 460*-510
Low carbon GB generation  % 29%- 38%- 62%- 99%
as a percentage of total  33%* 42%* 69%*
projected generation 
required in 2035
Industry Low carbon fuel switchinga TWh 110 115 125 157
Resource and energy  MtCO e 0 1 10 11
2
efficiency savings
Industry demand for  MtCO e 0 2 5 7
2
Industrial CCUS (not 
including BECCS)b
Fuel Supply Low carbon hydrogen  TWh  0 10** 40 80-140*
production 
Electrical power demand  % 0% 0% 31% 43%
from offshore oil and gas 
installations as a percentage 
of their total power demand
Heat and  Cumulative heat pumps  Million  0.2 1.1 4*- 4.3 6.9* - 
Buildings installed domestically installations 11.3
Cumulative homes  Million  0 0 0-0.2* 0-4*
converted to 100%  homes
hydrogen for heat
Yearly homes treated by new  Million  0 0.5 1 0.5
domestic energy efficiency  homes
measures
Low carbon fuelsa  % 62% 63% 67% 78%-
consumption as a  81%*
percentage of total fuel 
consumption in commercial 
buildings (excluding heat 
networks)
Yearly heat supplied via heat  TWh 14 16 22 29
networks
Yearly biomethane injected  TWh 3 8 12 12
into the grid
325Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Deployment 
Sector assumptions Unit 2019 2025 2030 2035
Agriculture  Yearly area of peatland  Ha  2,000- 7,000 10,290 10,290
and LULUCF under restoration in England 5,000***
Yearly area of afforestation in  Ha  13,600 30,000 40,000 50,000
the UK
Yearly area of perennial  Ha  0 7,440 21,275 26,350
energy crop and short 
rotation forestry planted
Farmers engaging with low  % 60% 70% 75% 85%
carbon farming practices as 
a percentage of total farmers
Waste and  Level of HFC consumption  % 63% 31% 21% 15%
F-gases relative to a 2015 baseline 
level
Greenhouse  BECCS and DACCS MtCO e 0 0 6 23
2
Gas Removals
Domestic  ZEVs as a percentage of  % 0.3% 6% 24% 53%
transport total car fleet
ZEVs as a percentage of  % 0.2% 2% 14% 40%
total van fleet
ZEVs as a percentage of  % 0% 0% 9% 37%
total HGV fleet
ZEVs as a percentage of  % 0.3% 9% 25% 48%
total bus and coach fleet
Single track kilometres  Km 0 350 650 650
electrified per year
Low carbon fuelsa use  % 5% 7% 8% 8%
in road transport as a 
percentage of total fuel use 
(in litres)
Journeys in towns and cities  % 42% 46% 50% 55%
that are cycled and walk 
as a percentage of total 
journeys in towns and cities
SAF use in domestic aviation  % 0% 1% 3% 6%
as a percentage of total fuel 
use (in tonnes)
Low carbon fuels usea in  % 0% 0% 1% 42%
domestic shipping as a 
percentage of total fuel use 
(in TWh)
326 Technical Annex
Deployment 
Sector assumptions Unit 2019 2025 2030 2035
International  SAF use in international  % 0% 1% 3% 6%
Aviation and  aviation as a percentage of 
Shipping (IAS) total fuel use (in tonnes)
Low carbon fuels*** use in  % 0% 0% 1% 28%
international shipping as a 
percentage of total fuel use 
(in TWh)
Overall GDP carbon intensity tCO e/ 194 144 93 62
2
GDP 
£m2020
GDP energy intensity MWh/ 700 600 480 380-400*
GDP 
£m2020
* Reflects deployment in hydrogen pathway. 
** Figure reflects hydrogen demand in the mid-2020s (rather than 2025 specifically).
*** The 2019 range for peat reflects different estimates of peat restoration in England, including both public and 
externally funded work.
a The table includes several deployment assumptions covering relevant low carbon fuels in different sectors. The 
low-carbon fuels included are the following: electricity, biofuels, solid biomass, hydrogen, ammonia and methanol. All 
of these deployment assumptions include electricity and hydrogen both in the numerator and denominator, with the 
exception of low-carbon fuels used in road transport (from which electricity and hydrogen are completely excluded).
b Industrial carbon capture deployment starts in the mid-2020s, reaching a total of 6Mt in 2030 and 9Mt in 2035 
including carbon capture from biomass use.
Costs and economic impacts of the transition
Costs of the transition average annual values over the carbon budget 
periods. The costs of the delivery pathway 
53. Table 11 shows the additional investment 
remain highly uncertain and will depend 
costs for the indicative delivery pathway in 
on factors such as technology costs and 
each of the future carbon budgets relative to a 
fuel prices. Ranges, where given, represent 
baseline of existing policies. These represent 
the implication of higher or lower demand 
in-year capital expenditure requirements, 
from end-use sectors consistent with the 
excluding financing costs, and do not cover 
electrification and hydrogen scenarios.
operational costs or savings, or policy costs. 
Costs are expressed in real 2020 prices as 
327Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Table 11: Estimates of additional investment requirements for Net Zero 
Strategy pathway (£bn pa, undiscounted, 2020 prices)
Carbon Budget  Carbon Budget  Carbon Budget  Carbon Budget 
3 (average  4 (average  5 (average  6 (average 
Sector  2020-2022)  2023-2027)  2028-2032)  2033-2037) 
Power* 1 7-8 11-22 12-23
Fuel Supply 0.3 2.0 1.3-2.3 0.6-1.9
Industry  0.0 0.9 1.1 0.9
Heat and  2 12 12 14
Buildings**
Transport  2 8 17 18
Natural  0.6 1.2 1.7 2.6
Resources, Waste, 
and F-Gases37 
Greenhouse Gas  0.0 0.7 1.6 1.7
Removals 
CCUS (T&S  0.0 0.6 1.2-1.4 0.8-1.0
Infrastructure)
Total  5-6 32-33 48-59 52-61
*Figures exclude additional Transmission and Distribution Network investment requirements.
**Costs represent a scenario where heat is predominantly decarbonised via electrification through heat pumps.
54. Table 11 excludes operating costs to 
avoid double counting (e.g. where CAPEX in 
an energy supply sector is OPEX in an end-
use sector). Over the same period, we could 
see additional resource savings of around 
£180 billion as a result of our reduced use of 
oil/petroleum products and natural gas. This 
has been calculated by multiplying the change 
in energy demand (relative to the baseline) by 
the corresponding long-run variable cost of 
energy supply (LRVCs) from The Green Book. 
This is based on the central price and the 
savings could be higher or lower, depending 
on how future prices evolve.
328 Technical Annex
Other economic and fiscal  -4.6% for late action. These changes are small 
considerations when set against expected growth of over 
50% in real GDP to 2050 compared to today’s 
Economic considerations  levels. Further information on the economic 
impacts of the transition to net zero are set out 
55. There are many economic impacts of 
in the HMT Net Zero Review.41
the transition to net zero to consider. As 
shown above, there are significant capital  Competitiveness
investment requirements, and although the 
58. The transition to net zero can stimulate 
exact requirements are uncertain it is clear 
innovation that increases domestic 
that patterns of investment will have to 
competitiveness and global comparative 
change. New jobs will also be created, and 
advantage for some UK industries, providing 
these jobs may require different skills and 
potential export opportunities. Updated 
education. Consumption and production 
internal analysis based on the Energy 
behaviours will shift towards greener choices, 
Innovation Needs Assessment estimates that 
and different places and sectors in the UK 
just over half of the £60 billion GVA potential 
could face different economic opportunities 
from sectoral decarbonisation in 2050 
and challenges.
comes from export related opportunities.42 
56. Previous cost benefit analysis of the  However, there will also be risks to sectors 
sixth carbon budget showed that there are  and industries susceptible to competitiveness 
significant co-benefits to the transition to net  impacts, particularly those that are trade-
zero.38 As well as the benefits from reduced  exposed and/or carbon intensive. Where UK 
greenhouse gas emissions, improvements to  firms lose market share to international firms 
air quality were valued at £35 billion to 2050,  with lower environmental standards, there is a 
fuel savings at £123 billion and other benefits  risk of carbon leakage. There is little empirical 
to natural capital at £5 billion. The net present  evidence of this occurring in the UK to date, 
value of meeting the sixth carbon budget  but risks could increase as further policy 
and net zero target, compared to no further  is implemented.
action, was estimated as a net benefit of 
59. Historically, the UK’s approach to 
£266 billion.39 This calculation does not include 
mitigating competitiveness impacts and 
many other potential co-benefits, such as 
carbon leakage risk has been through issuing 
reduced noise pollution from cars, improved 
free allowances under the EU ETS.43 This 
health from walking and cycling and warmer 
approach has been carried over to the UK 
homes from energy efficiency measures, nor 
ETS, and possible changes to free allowances 
indirect costs from macroeconomic impacts.
are currently under review.44 BEIS also 
57. In terms of the macroeconomic impact of  provides compensation to certain energy 
the transition to net zero, the Office for Budget  intensive industries for the indirect emission 
Responsibility (OBR) finds that the costs of  cost due to the UK ETS and some sectors 
failing to get climate change under control,  receive a reduction in energy consumption 
which relies on global effort, would be much  tax via Climate Change Agreements. The 
larger than those of bringing emissions down  eventual impact of decarbonisation on firms at 
to net zero.40 In terms of transition costs,  risk will depend on future policy development, 
the OBR has presented scenarios in which  particularly relating to the UK ETS.
the level of UK GDP changes relative to the 
baseline by between -4.6% and +1.6% by 
2050, with a central estimate of -1.4% for 
early action on climate change compared to 
329Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
60. The magnitude of competitiveness  62. HMT’s Net Zero Review45 and the OBR’s 
effects in international markets is dependent  recent fiscal risks report46 provide a more 
on global climate ambition as well as  detailed overview of the channels through 
domestic policy. If other countries, particularly  which the net zero transition can impact the 
the UK’s trading partners, increase their  UK’s fiscal position, and the factors which 
industrial decarbonisation ambition in line  will determine the overall magnitude of this 
with the UK’s, and face similar transition  impact. While noting uncertainties, the OBR 
impacts, then competitiveness effects will  concluded that there could be significant fiscal 
be smaller. Similarly, where the UK’s path to  benefits from transitioning to net zero sooner 
net zero creates export opportunities for UK  rather than later. However, governments public 
businesses, the size of these will depend on  spending will be dependent on the economic, 
the actions of the rest of the world. High global  fiscal and decarbonisation context of the time.
climate ambition will result in a large market 
Jobs
for decarbonisation technologies and services 
but may also result in more global competition 
63. The policies and sectoral ambitions 
in those markets.
across the Net Zero Strategy are estimated 
to support up to 190,000 jobs in low carbon 
Fiscal considerations
and green sectors by the middle of the 2020s, 
61. The overall fiscal impacts of the transition  and up to 440,000 by 2030. The breakdown 
to net zero will depend on many as yet  of jobs by chapter is as follows. Information 
unknown factors, including the financing  on the methodology used to calculate these 
mechanisms used to fund the policies and  numbers can be found in the evidence base 
proposals set out in the Net Zero Strategy,  section of this annex.
and the macroeconomic impacts of the 
transition, for example through changes in 
GDP growth or inflation. There are some 
known fiscal impacts, such as the erosion of 
direct tax receipts like fuel duty that depend 
on carbon intensive activity, and increased tax 
receipts from other policies, such as revenue 
from the UK ETS.
330 Technical Annex
Table 12: Estimate of jobs supported in Net Zero Strategy pathways, by 
sector and date
Sector Jobs supported by 2024/5 Jobs supported in 2030
Power 59,000 120,000
Fuel Supply N/A 10,000
Industry 5,000 54,000
Heat and buildings 100,000 175,000
Transport 22,000 74,000
Natural resources, waste and  2,000 2,000
F-gases (forestry only)
Greenhouse Gas Removals N/A N/A
Total 190,000 440,000
64. The Ten Point Plan for a Green industrial  65. Government has also set out its 
Revolution47 published in November 2019  ambition to pivot towards a green economy 
set out plans to support up to 250,000  supporting up to 2 million green jobs by 
jobs by 2030, which was based on specific  2030. This is a wider ambition which includes 
sectors included within the Ten Point Plan.  areas of economic activity not included in 
The figures in this Net Zero Strategy include  the Net Zero Strategy but which support 
areas not covered by the Ten Point Plan, such  other environmental goals, such as climate 
as solar and onshore wind. In several cases,  adaptation and the circular economy. 
most notably around Heat and Buildings and 
Transport, figures have been updated since 
the Ten Point Plan was announced. 
Wider impacts of the transition to net zero
66. Section 10 of the Climate Change Act 
lists various factors that must be taken into 
consideration by all decisions relating to 
carbon budgets, while Section 13 requires 
that the policies and proposals set out in 
the Net Zero Strategy as a whole contribute 
to sustainable development. These factors 
have been taken into account in relation to 
proposals and policies that will enable the 
UK to meet its carbon budgets, as set out 
throughout this annex and in the main body 
of the Strategy. 
331Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Table 13: Summary of wider considerations
Consideration in 
Factor Net Zero Strategy Conclusions
Scientific knowledge See Climate Science  The scientific case for strong action on climate change 
Annex remains definitive.
Technology See Journey to Net Zero,  The latest evidence on relevant climate technologies 
sector chapters, Technical  has been used for all analysis across the strategy.
Annex
Economic  See Technical Annex, Why  There are many economic and competitiveness 
Net Zero, Green Jobs,  impacts of the transition, some of which are positive 
Skills, and Industries,  and some negative. We make no overall conclusion.
Investment, Innovation, 
Green Choices and Local 
Climate Action chapters
Fiscal See Technical Annex The full fiscal impact of the transition is not yet known 
and will depend on varied policy decisions and 
economic outcomes.
Sustainable  See Reducing Emissions  There are both positive and negative natural capital 
development across the Economy  impacts associated with emissions reduction policies 
chapters, Technical Annex,  but the overall contribution to sustainable development 
Embedding Net Zero  is likely positive. Other aspects of sustainable 
chapter  development are addressed in the economic, fiscal 
and social sections.
Energy policy See Journey to Net Zero  Delivering our carbon budgets has the potential to 
and Power chapters, and  reduce demand for gas, coal, oil and transport fuels 
Technical Annex which could improve security of supply by diversifying 
away from primarily imported fossil fuels. Other 
measures will mean increases in electrification and 
the simultaneous deep decarbonisation of electricity 
supply, which carries security of supply risks. 
Estimations of the future energy and carbon intensity of 
the economy are presented in Table 10 of the Technical 
Annex.
Social  See Technical Annex,  Price and bill impacts will depend on electricity market 
Green Choices, and  developments and consumption patterns. Policies that 
Buildings chapters improve energy efficiency of homes will reduce bills 
and benefit fuel poor households.
IAS See Technical Annex,  IAS emissions will be included from the sixth carbon 
Transport chapter budget onwards and will use the bunker fuel sales 
method to calculate emissions. Projected IAS 
emissions are set out in Table 8.
International and  See International climate  The UK has world leading ambition on climate change 
European leadership and Why Net  and is committed to advancing global climate action. 
Zero chapters The UK has now left the EU and is no longer bound by 
EU climate policies.
332 Technical Annex
Consideration in 
Factor Net Zero Strategy Conclusions
Devolved  See sector chapters and  The NZS pathway analysis includes modelling of the 
circumstances Technical Annex scope to reduce emissions in each nation, considering 
their differing circumstances. These assumptions 
are broadly in line with the CCC’s distributions of 
abatement by nation. Key assumptions are outlined in 
the evidence base section below.
67. The following section considers two of  70. In line with HM Treasury Green Book, a 
these impacts in more detail: sustainable  natural capital perspective is taken to analyse 
development, which is considered through  these implications, whereby the impact of 
analysis of the effects of policies and  policies and proposals on the natural assets 
proposals on natural capital; and social  on which the economy depends is assessed.48 
considerations, including the potential impacts  It is not yet possible to provide a complete 
on energy bills and fuel poverty.  assessment of the delivery implications of 
policies and proposals, as many are still 
Sustainable development and 
subject to designs and implementations upon 
natural capital which the impacts are dependent. The extent 
that the natural capital impacts are mitigated 
68. Sustainable development concerns the 
will be dependent on the options considered 
stability and prosperity of society, and its 
in policy specific delivery analysis.
capacity to provide for future generations. 
Sustainable development also incorporates  71. To assess the potential natural capital 
social, economic, and environmental  impacts of a policy, a series of screening 
dimensions of sustainability. The Act requires  questions are used.49 Following this, the main 
carbon budget proposals and policies  benefits and risks associated with net zero 
as a whole to contribute to sustainable  policies are listed for different natural capital 
development. The main outcomes of the  stocks. This is an indicative assessment of the 
policies and proposals in this Strategy  natural capital impacts due to the limitations 
will have a positive impact on the UK’s  described above. As such, the large majority 
contribution to the global Sustainable  of measures in this strategy require further 
Development Goals, in particular goal 7,  natural capital assessment. All policies will be 
targeting affordable and clean energy, and  assessed for natural capital benefits and risks 
goal 13, targeting climate action.  in their impact assessments and business 
cases according to Green Book guidance. 
69. In this section, we assess the 
This includes considering the implications 
sustainability implications of the net 
of policies for natural assets and any 
zero transition in terms of its impact on 
associated effects on wider economic welfare. 
the continuation and improvement of 
More information on the natural capital 
environmental functions, and stability and 
approach can be found in the Green Book 
renewal of natural assets. This is most relevant 
supplementary guidance and the Enabling a 
to the Sustainable Development Goals 6, 14 
Natural Capital Approach guidance.50
and 15, which target protection of water and 
life on land and marine habitats.
333Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
72. Delivery of net zero policies and proposals  74. The policies and proposals taken together 
will need to consider the UK’s other legally  within the Net Zero Strategy are expected to 
binding environmental commitments (for  have a significant net benefit to natural capital 
example, new legally binding targets stemming  and thus sustainable development. Moving 
from the Environment Bill), and any trade-offs  away from i) fossil fuels towards a greater 
against these acknowledged and mitigated  share of renewable energy, ii) petrol and diesel 
through careful planning policies and  cars towards green alternatives such as 
actions can be designed that deliver multiple  electric vehicles iii) gas boilers to lower carbon 
outcomes in support of the UK’s net zero  heating sources and iv) high carbon land 
and 25 Year Environment Plan ambitions.  uses towards afforestation and other land-
For instance, the planting of broadleaf trees  based carbon dioxide removals, are just a few 
and restoration of peatland or grassland  examples that will provide significant benefits. 
can deliver carbon sequestration as well as 
75. However, some negative impacts to 
environmental benefits including improved 
some natural capital stocks are likely to arise 
biodiversity and water quality, if done in the 
from realising climate targets; impacts will 
right way. Conversely, certain interventions 
likely be specific and localised. For example, 
such as planting of maize for biomass or 
the development of BECCS technology 
food may risk soil health and water quality. 
could lead to a rise in PM2.5 released in 
It will be important to assess the wider 
these areas. The direction of impact from 
impacts of proposed net zero actions and 
the significant land use change required to 
seek synergies with environmental ambitions 
meet net zero will depend on how and where 
wherever possible, so that the twin challenges 
this change is enacted, with a systemic and 
of biodiversity loss and climate change are 
spatial approach more likely to deliver on net 
tackled in an efficient way.
zero while providing natural capital benefits. 
73. The independent Natural Capital  Further in-depth exploration of the natural 
Committee defined natural capital as ‘those  capital impacts of specific policies and policy 
elements of the natural environment which  mixes will need to be undertaken through 
provide valuable goods and services to  the normal channels of Impact Assessments 
people’.51 Nature underpins the UK’s economy  and Business Cases, to ensure trade-offs are 
and society: the energy, food, and water we  managed and impacts mitigated.
consume; the air we breathe; our access 
76. Air Quality: As climate change and air 
to green space; and biodiversity, which is 
pollution have many of the same contributing 
crucial in underpinning all our ecosystem and 
emission sources, the decarbonisation of the 
abiotic services, and in maintaining ecological 
UK economy offers major opportunities to 
function.52 Nature is a major economic sector 
significantly reduce air pollution and therefore 
in its own right – as a productive asset it 
improve human health and reduce the impact 
provides market and non-market services of 
of some air pollutants on ecosystems. This is 
£25 billion each year.53
primarily driven through the reduction of petrol 
and diesel cars towards green alternatives, 
as well as the continual shift away from fossil 
fuels in heat and power generation. However, 
some policies and proposals could result 
in significant negative air quality impacts at 
both regional and local scales, for example 
emissions of fine particulate matter from 
biomass combustion, ammonia from the use 
of anaerobic digestion, and NOx emissions 
334 Technical Annex
from hydrogen combustion in domestic  78. Biodiversity: In the long-term, net 
or industrial settings. These are likely to  zero policies, for example, afforestation 
impact our ability to reach statutory national  and peatland restoration, can be positive 
emissions ceilings, increase exposure to  for biodiversity, preservation, connectivity, 
harmful pollutants and cause some uneven  resilience and reducing ecological stress 
health burdens. Furthermore, the impacts of  caused by climate change. However, 
air pollution can also impact the delivery of net  biodiversity and habitats are spatially explicit, 
zero. For example, all of England’s forests and  meaning locations and extent of future 
peatlands continue to be damaged by harmful  policies must seek to minimise any negative 
emissions – particularly ammonia – which  impacts, including displacement, air and 
impact their ability to provide the ecosystem  noise pollution, and habitat loss, for example 
services required to meet net zero, including  through housing or industry development. 
carbon sequestration and flood mitigation.  This could be minimised through further 
Historic pollution loading across all habitats  work on net gain principles which would 
may also need to be ameliorated to maximise  seek to leave the environment in a better 
the potential of restoring them to meet the  position. Other risks include ensuring land 
biodiversity targets in the Environment Bill.  use changes (i.e. afforestation, biomass 
Further work will be undertaken to assess this  feedstocks, settlement expansion) do not lead 
and provide advice on tailoring our pathway  to biodiversity loss. Mitigating actions and 
to minimise these impacts. Continuous  trade-offs will be considered when designing 
improvements in emission requirements and  policies for reaching climate targets, including 
innovation in abatement technologies will also  for low carbon technologies, greenhouse gas 
be necessary to deliver a pathway to net zero  removals, marine policies, land management, 
that maximises environmental benefits. and agricultural intensification.
77. Recreation: Achieving climate targets  79. Floods: Global temperature rise is 
could have positive impacts for recreation  leading to increased precipitation levels 
and the provision of landscape amenity,  within the UK. There are a number of nature-
with a transition to a low carbon economy  based solutions such as the creation of new 
providing spaces to enjoy nature. This will  woodlands, planting of biomass crops such 
primarily be driven by new woodland creation  as willow, increased levels of upland peatland 
for recreation and forestry more widely (where  restoration, and strategically located natural 
access permitted), woodland management  flood management measures which can have 
and restoring peatlands. Green transport  positive impacts on flood risk management. 
will also provide the opportunity to regularly  For example, increased upland water storage 
access green spaces, parks and woodlands.  improves the capacity of the UK’s waterbodies 
Some policies may cause landscape issues for  to prevent floods downstream. This will have 
example, solar and onshore wind generation. varied benefits through reducing damages 
from floods to property, agricultural land 
and health, and reduced carbon emissions 
from floods. Conversely, rewetting lowland 
peatlands may reduce the water storage 
capacity of those landscapes with possible 
impacts on local flood risk.
335Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
80. Water availability and quality: Whilst  82. Rare metals: Materials are finite. Some 
many policies have positive impacts on  low carbon technologies are dependent on 
water availability and quality, for example  critical raw materials, many of which are 
through upland peatland restoration and  rare, found in unique locations and in high 
strategic planting of trees, some low carbon  demand globally, for example cobalt, lithium 
technologies are water-intensive and large- and nickel. Many of these rare metals are 
scale implementation could result in pressures  sourced internationally and extraction of them 
on water demand. For example, nuclear power  may place pressure on the natural capital 
and hydrogen production require high levels  stock in the country of origin. There are risks 
of water input for cooling and electrolysis,  associated with overreliance on specific 
respectively and certain biomass crops (for  technologies where raw material scarcity 
use in BECCS) have high water demand. This  may grow and geopolitics may determine 
is set against a backdrop of increasing global  access, for example, rare earth elements 
water scarcity in a changing climate. The UK  such as neodymium for use in magnets. 
is no exception, with increasing likelihood  These risks will be assessed in relevant policy 
of warmer, drier summers. Therefore, water  delivery analysis.
demand both regionally and nationally should 
83. Land Use: Land is finite. Meeting climate 
be considered at a systems level, to ensure 
targets will require significant and competing 
sustainable demand. 
demands from land, for example, for food, 
81. Raw materials: Resource efficiency  shelter, goods and service production, 
policies will have a net benefit to pressures  ecosystem services and greenhouse gas 
on raw material availability, reducing raw  abatement. This will result in large changes 
material demand and consumption. Reduced  to land use and management. The pathway 
resource extraction and processing will  in the Net Zero Strategy is reliant on land use 
also benefit other natural capital assets. For  change linked to tree planting, peat restoration 
example, 90% of global biodiversity loss  and growing perennial energy crops or short 
and water stress is caused by resource  rotation forestry for use as biomass. This 
extraction and processing.54 Moving towards  change will impact on the extent and condition 
a circular economy, where priority is placed  of natural capital assets and the ecosystem 
on extending the lifetime and lifecycle of a  services they provide. The direction of impact 
product through sharing, reusing, repairing,  (positive or negative) and its magnitude will 
redesign and recycling, is likely to have a  depend on how and where land conversion 
positive impact on a number of natural capital  happens. A systemic and spatial approach 
stocks, primarily water quality and availability,  to land use, that considers net zero, socio-
air quality and reducing pressures on land use. environmental objectives, and various socio-
economic factors such as population and 
economic growth, is necessary to enact land 
use changes that delivers net zero as well as 
environmental outcomes in line with the 25 
Year Environment Plan. Such an approach 
enables trade-offs to be managed among 
different objectives while facilitating win-win 
outcomes- for instance with flood protection 
and recreation. 
336 Technical Annex
Social considerations 88. Patterns of energy consumption will also 
change. Most households and businesses are 
84. Over the last decade there have been 
likely to increase their use of electricity, but 
changes in the underlying costs of energy bills, 
reduce gas and petrol/diesel consumption, 
which have been mitigated through energy 
as they shift to low carbon forms of transport 
efficiency measures, helping consumers 
and heating (such as electric vehicles 
to use less energy. Electricity prices have 
and heat pumps). It is essential to ensure 
trended upwards due to rising network costs 
that price incentives are fair and help 
and support for low carbon infrastructure 
support this transition away from relying on 
and vulnerable households. Gas prices have 
fossil fuel prices.
fluctuated due to international wholesale gas 
prices, which in recent months have been  89. It will remain the case that households 
particularly volatile. and businesses who install energy saving 
measures will reap significant savings.
85. Government energy saving schemes 
have been targeted towards low-income or  90. As we progress towards net zero, the 
vulnerable households, and the retail energy  Government is committed to ensuring the 
price cap has helped protect those customers  costs of decarbonising the energy system 
on default energy tariffs. Steps have also  are fair and affordable for all energy users. 
been taken to protect industries most  We are considering both the benefits and the 
exposed to the UK’s relatively higher industrial  costs of different pathways holistically across 
electricity prices. the economy and will work with industry and 
consumers to keep costs down.
86. The policies set out in the Net Zero 
Strategy will help insulate consumers from  91. The impact of decarbonisation on 
the over-reliance on fossil fuels which they  progress in tackling fuel poverty will be 
face today, and help to shield households,  determined by changes in electricity and 
business, and the wider economy from the  fuel prices, and higher energy efficiency in 
destabilising effects of this reliance. the housing stock. In particular, policies to 
improve energy efficiency in homes - such as 
87. How electricity and gas bills will change 
the Social Housing Decarbonisation Fund, 
on the path to net zero depends on factors 
Home Upgrade Grant, Energy Company 
such as technology costs, patterns of 
Obligation and proposals on Minimum Energy 
consumer energy use and the government’s 
Efficiency Standards - will help to improve 
gradual approach to rebalancing where 
the building performance for the homes of 
social and policy costs fall. The nature of 
those in or at risk of fuel poverty. The Warm 
costs in a smart, clean energy system will be 
Homes Discount will support fuel poor homes 
different. The largest part of the electricity bill 
through reduced bill costs. Fuel poverty is a 
is currently the cost to energy suppliers from 
devolved matter. In England we are committed 
buying power. This cost has traditionally been 
to our target for fuel poor households, as far 
determined by the underlying price of gas or 
as reasonably practicable, to be living in a 
coal, but this is changing. Gas will continue 
home rated EPC Band C or better by 2030. 
to play a role in setting the electricity price for 
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have 
some years to come but, over time, will do so 
their own fuel poverty targets and are also 
less frequently, as more and more low carbon 
working to improve the energy efficiency of 
generation (such as wind and solar) connect 
their building stock.
to the electricity system - consistent with the 
commitment to a fully decarbonised power 
system by 2035. This will help put downward 
pressured on wholesale electricity prices.
337Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Evidence base
Sectoral evidence
Power
BEIS’ Dynamic Dispatch Model (DDM) has been used to generate technically feasible 
pathways that are consistent with achieving the NDC in 2030, the sixth carbon budget 
in 2033-37 and net zero in 2050.55 This model was developed by BEIS and is used for all 
power sector analysis within the department. This includes the Modelling 2050 – Electricity 
System Analysis report that was published with the Energy White Paper and the Energy 
and Emissions projections.56 It was also used for the power sector analysis in the CCC’s 
Sixth Carbon Budget report although the CCC used their own assumptions and off-model 
adjustments for this.57 Assumptions for the Northern Ireland power sector demand and 
emission pathway are based on the CCC’s Sixth Carbon Budget advice. 
The DDM relies on many exogenous assumptions and inputs, and results can be sensitive 
to changes in these assumptions. This includes using electricity demand from UKTM and 
other sectors analysis and evidence on different technologies costs and characteristics 
from BEIS’ generation costs report.58 Both full pathway runs and single year analysis is 
used to underpin the strategy set out in the power sector chapter.
Distribution Network outcomes are modelled in the Distributions Networks Model (DNM). 
The DNM conducts electricity power flow analysis across 10 representative regional 
networks to estimate future distribution network constraints (thermal violations and voltage 
imbalances). The results of the constraint analysis are then fed into a separate investment 
model to calculate reinforcement costs up to 2050.
Investment costs for power plant generation capacity and flexible assets are calculated 
from the DDM based on technological costs assumptions. Transmission and Distribution 
Network costs have been calculated separately. The costs for networks provided are in 
Allowed Revenues terms. Allowed Revenue estimates are the costs that network operators 
will be allowed to recover annually – as decided by Ofgem as part of their RIIO price 
control process. These are therefore the network costs that will be passed through each 
year. They do not represent the total value of investment in assets.
The 2050 illustrative scenarios represent the power sector at a less granular level than 
DDM. Supplementary adjustments and results were validated by DDM but should not 
be read as predictive of the optimal technology mix in 2050. For a detailed assessment 
of potential scenarios for the 2050 electricity system please consult the Modelling 
2050: electricity system analysis published alongside the Energy White Paper.59 The 
high electrification scenario assumes no hydrogen availability for power to illustrate an 
alternative power sector trajectory.
338 Technical Annex
Fuel Supply and Hydrogen
Hydrogen: The hydrogen demand needed to meet the sixth carbon budget in industry, 
power, buildings and transport was estimated as set out in the evidence base sections 
for those sectors. The hydrogen production capacity needed to meet this demand has 
been calculated assuming hydrogen production plants run at a 95% load factor. Evidence 
on hydrogen supply and demand has also been drawn from the Hydrogen Strategy: 
further detail can be found in the Hydrogen Strategy analytical annex.60, 61 Estimates of 
hydrogen production costs are based on the evidence set out in the hydrogen production 
cost report.62
Upstream Oil and Gas: The pathway for upstream oil and gas was developed using the 
OGA’s projected abatement from offshore electrification and flaring. 
Estimates of potential abatement from offshore electrification (scope 1 emissions only) 
were developed using the best available data provided to the OGA by industry as of 
August 2021, and assumes that there will be a mixture of some installations being partially 
electrified and some being fully electrified (the list of these installations was provided by 
industry). Fully electrified installations were estimated, in line with industry representatives’ 
assessment, to have 70% of power demand provided by electrification, while partially 
electrified ones have 43%. Additionally, it is assumed that project phasing is one year 
and that electrification of the installation would not affect previously reported economic 
cessation of production dates. 
The estimate of GHG emissions abatement via flaring reduction from offshore oil and gas 
infrastructure was developed assuming that zero routine flaring will be in place across all 
UKCS assets in 2030. Routine flaring is assumed to be broadly consistent with category 
1 flaring (now defined by the OGA as category A flaring). Future expected flare volumes 
were calculated by subtracting the routine element of flaring from total anticipated flaring 
per facility after 2030, with data taken from the UK Stewardship Survey. Flared gas values, 
in both mass and volume units, have been converted to CO2 emissions using emission 
factors observed in published datasets (e.g. EEMS).63
Capex assumptions for Upstream Oil and Gas abatement measures have been sourced 
from the CCC’s Sixth Carbon Budget advice. The overall cost profile has been calculated 
by BEIS and is aligned to the deployment trajectory underpinning the sector’s illustrative 
emissions pathway. This is an early analysis with significant uncertainties. Through 
discussion with the OGA BEIS is confident that these estimates are in the right order of 
magnitude, however actual costs might end up being higher.
Hydrogen and other fuel supply assumptions for 2050 are aligned with those used in the 
Sixth Carbon Budget Impact Assessment. The level of curtailment available for electrolysis 
was taken directly from the power sector modelling.
339Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Industry
A model of the UK industrial sector called Net Zero Industrial Pathways (NZIP) has been 
used to generate a technically feasible pathway to achieve a net zero industry sector by 
2050. The model was developed by Element Energy for BEIS and the Climate Change 
Committee (CCC)64 and was used to underpin the manufacturing and construction sector 
analysis in the CCC’s Sixth Carbon Budget report65 and the Government’s Industrial 
Decarbonisation Strategy (IDS),66 published in March 2021. The industry pathway required 
to reach net zero is based on the IDS National Networks scenario but achieves a faster 
trajectory through earlier decarbonisation of the Iron and Steel sector and increased CCS 
ambition by 2030. The model calculates the least cost pathway for a range of technologies, 
assessed on their capital and operating costs, along with cost reductions over time due 
to technology learning, and a number of key constraints impacting their deployment (e.g. 
technology readiness level, hydrogen and CO  transport and storage availability, supply 
2
chain capacity).
The 2050 scenario analysis includes supplementary adjustments to align the UKTM 
emissions, energy demands and CCS requirements with the evidence base in NZIP IDS 
2050 scenarios. In the high electrification and high resource scenarios these align with the 
National Networks scenario, whilst the high innovation scenario is more representative of 
the Cluster Networks scenario.
Heat and Buildings
Both heat and buildings scenarios are developed to be consistent with completely 
decarbonising buildings by 2050 to meet a net zero target. With the assumption that a 
typical heating appliance has a lifetime of 15 years, this implies that no new fossil fuel 
heating systems can be installed after 2035. The high electrification scenario assumes 
that hydrogen is not available as an option for heating buildings, so the level of heat 
pump deployment grows from its current level of around 35,000 in 2020 to be able to 
meet the turnover of fossil fuel systems in 2035. In scenarios involving hydrogen, heat 
pump deployment meets the common ambition of 600,000 heat pumps by 2028, and 
further growth is dependent on the level of hydrogen deployment to generate the same 
level of carbon savings between scenarios. Installation of energy efficiency measures and 
deployment of low carbon heat networks is assumed to be same in all scenarios.
Domestic Energy Efficiency: The domestic energy efficiency modelling was carried 
out using the National Household Model.67 This model estimates the impact of installing 
different measures in different properties by applying the Standard Assessment 
Procedure68 to a representative sample of the housing stock based on the English Housing 
Survey.69 Further adjustments are made to modelled savings to account for factors such 
as the real-life performance of measures and people heating their homes to a more 
comfortable temperature when their energy bills are reduced. Cost data for different 
measures comes from a variety of published sources, as well as some internal data.70, 71, 72 
The deployment profile for measures was estimated based on current and planned policies 
and proposals.
340 Technical Annex
Non-Domestic Buildings - Commercial and public: The sixth carbon budget pathway for 
commercial and public sector buildings was created using BEIS Non-Domestic Buildings 
Model (NDBM). This models the deployment of low carbon heating and energy efficiency 
measures in non-domestic buildings. The NDBM uses building stock characteristics 
and potential energy efficiency information from the Building Energy Efficiency Survey 
(BEES) dataset.73 Data on energy consumption and emissions come from the Digest of 
UK Energy Statistics, Energy and Emissions Projections, and ECUK.74, 75, 76 The model has 
been supplemented with updated information on off-gas grid buildings from the Non-
domestic National Energy Efficiency Data-Framework (ND-NEED); and updated cost and 
efficiency assumptions for Heating Ventilation and Cooling (HVAC) technologies in non-
domestic buildings.77 Modelling assumptions for public sector buildings have been further 
refined through monitoring the on-going rollout of phase 1 and 2 of the Public Sector 
Decarbonisation Scheme.
Products Policy: For products policies, as well as the sources listed above, additional 
data is taken from the ONS, consultation with trade associations and research provided 
by external contractors to develop the evidence base. The average energy consumption 
of products in the pathway are compared to the market average to calculate energy 
savings, taking into account product lifetime, usage and different technology types. Costs 
associated with products price increases, staff labour and training and installation costs 
are also taken into account, as well as interaction with EU and international trade and 
product regulations.
Domestic Heat Pumps: Deployment of domestic heat pumps is based on simple analysis 
of the residential stock, segmenting homes by heating fuel, and considering natural 
replacement cycles. The trajectory of heat pumps is based on estimates of deployment 
from current and planned policies, supply chain growth required to meet phasing out of 
new fossil fuel heating systems, and use of the natural replacement cycle to remove all 
fossil fuel heating in homes by 2050. Assumptions on appliance costs and performance, 
and on potential supply chain growth, are based on published research.78, 79, 80 Assumptions 
on the current building stock and heat demand are from the NHM and domestic NEED.81, 82 
Assumptions on new build homes are based on DHLUC’s 2019 FHS Consultation stage 
Impact Assessment - these were produced externally by consultants and an independent 
consortium.83 These are for appraisal purposes only, and are not an official forecast of 
housing supply.
Hydrogen: Deployment of hydrogen for heat in buildings up to the sixth carbon budget 
has been modelled using a spatial analysis approach considering the metered gas 
demand from residential, commercial and public buildings within an expanding radius 
around potential industrial cluster sites producing hydrogen. Spatial gas demand has been 
derived from NEED data and assumptions on rollout rate have been taken from the CCC’s 
residential heat decarbonisation scenarios from their Sixth Carbon Budget advice.84, 85, 86 
Additional assumptions on overall demand for scaling are from DUKES.87
341Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Heat Networks: Deployment of heat networks has been derived from the expected impact 
of capital support and regulation, informed by the heat network opportunity areas.88 The 
analysis appraises the impact of low-carbon heat network policies, and on fuel demand 
relative to a predominately gas-fired counterfactual, to estimate carbon savings. The costs 
technical assumption come from a AECOM report, but a number of assumptions have 
been updated since using learning from the Heat Network Investment Projects (HNIP).89, 90
Biomethane: Plant deployment scenarios are based on a combination of historic 
deployment under the Renewable Heat Incentive (RHI), and commercial intelligence. 
Heat generated is estimated from plant deployment scenarios and using estimates 
for biomethane injection as proportion of capacity.91 The internal BEIS Biomass Heat 
Pathways Tool provides assumptions on biogeneration emissions, feedstock costs, 
capex and opex costs.92 These capex and opex costs have also been verified against 
cost information collected through market intelligence, the Non-Domestic RHI Evaluation, 
and a review of AD plant costs commissioned by BEIS and awarded to the National 
Non-Food Crops Centre (NNFCC). Rothamsted Research has provided assumptions 
on upstream carbon savings, linked to diverting feedstocks from counterfactual uses to 
AD, and ammonia impacts.93 Downstream carbon savings, linked to the displacement of 
natural gas with biomethane, are estimated using emissions factors provided in the HMT 
Green Book supplementary guidance.94 Fertiliser savings are valued using the average of 
fertiliser prices published by the Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board across 
multiple years.95 Full methodology and assumptions can be found in the final stage impact 
assessment for the Green Gas Support Scheme.96
The 2050 UKTM scenarios represent the housing stock at a less granular level but have 
been calibrated to the sectoral evidence base. The high electrification scenario assumes 
no availability of hydrogen for heating, the high resource scenario limits the deployment of 
electric heating, whilst the high innovation scenario is left to optimise outcomes. 
Transport
Domestic Transport: The pathway for domestic transport covers road transport, rail, 
domestic shipping and domestic aviation. The Net Zero Strategy pathway for road 
transport, rail and domestic aviation was developed using projections from the recently 
published Transport Decarbonisation Plan (TDP).97 These projections were produced using 
a range of models and analysis, including the National Transport Model (road transport), 
Traction Decarbonisation Network Strategy (rail), and the Aviation model, adjusted for 
decarbonising transport measures.98 The forecasts presented in the TDP considered a 
number of scenarios. The Net Zero Strategy pathway for road transport, rail and domestic 
aviation assumes an ambitious policy package within the range of policy outcomes 
explored in the TDP. These emissions savings are applied to a central demand scenario. 
The Net Zero Strategy pathway for domestic shipping is based on research commissioned 
by the Department for Transport (DfT) – see below for further details.
342 Technical Annex
International Aviation and Shipping: The Net Zero Strategy pathway for international 
aviation was developed using projections from the TDP and the Jet Zero Consultation.99 
This uses the same Aviation model and assumptions as used for the domestic aviation 
projections. The DfT’s Aviation model is an established suite of interrelated components 
used to produce forecasts for aviation demand at the national level, and the associated 
passenger numbers, aircrafts and CO  emissions from flights departing from UK airports.100 
2
Three abatement measures are considered within the modelling; system efficiencies, 
sustainable aviation fuels (SAF), and zero emission aircraft.
As with the Net Zero Strategy pathway for domestic shipping, the pathway for international 
shipping is based on research commissioned by the Department for Transport (DfT).101 For 
both pathways, the estimates from this research have been adjusted to align them with 
the latest UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics.102 Therefore, the pathways 
for domestic shipping and international shipping are consistent with the definitions of 
domestic shipping and international shipping used in these national statistics.103 Given the 
emerging nature of zero emission shipping fuels, the NZS pathways for domestic shipping 
and international shipping should be interpreted as a possible scenario for meeting the 
government’s commitment to achieving net zero in maritime rather than estimates of the 
impact of specific policies.
The illustrative 2050 scenarios rely on the same evidence base for transport as the Sixth 
Carbon Budget Impact Assessment with the exception of the high innovation scenarios, 
where modelling updates on aviation to reflect DfT’s Jet Zero consultation high ambition 
scenario, and the scenarios for shipping which have been aligned with the NZS pathways 
described above. To support the sustainable fuel production requirements additional 
assumptions have been taken from the Advanced Gasification Technology review.104
Natural Resources and Waste
Agriculture: The agriculture emissions trajectory is based on estimates of maximum 
technical GHG mitigation potential (MTP) for each technology from the Clean Growth 
through Sustainable Intensification (CGSI) Project and building upon previous work by the 
CCC. MTP quantifies the impact if all farms which could technically adopt a measure do 
so, whilst considering any current uptake to avoid double counting.105 MTP was derived 
from expert review of published literature and modelling to scale experimental data to 
national level. These estimates have been independently peer reviewed. CGSI used the 
MTP values to derive the trajectory based on ambitious but feasible deployment rates. 
The trajectory was informed by academic, industry and policy experts to reflect barriers, 
technology readiness and R&D lead in times.
Additional stretch options were modelled through Defra analysis using CGSI and CCC 
data, generally through adjustments to implementation rates. Additional modelling 
addressing agricultural mobile machinery aligned to CCC analysis in its Sixth Carbon 
Budget Report. England only data was scaled to a UK basis using the relative emission 
share between England and the Devolved Administrations as an estimator of Devolved 
Administration potential, pending publication of the Devolved Administrations pathways.
343Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
The UKTM modelling for the 2050 scenarios uses the same evidence base as the 
agriculture emissions trajectory. A set of crop and livestock measures are characterised by 
their cost and maximum technical potential to reduce emissions, and these assumptions 
are the same across the three scenarios.
Biomass: The biomass analysis is an indicative technical assessment of potential carbon 
abatement assuming optimal species/site/climate matching and a relatively simplistic 
approach to modelling carbon removals. Five biomass crop categories were modelled, 
deployed in fixed proportions: exotic SRF (14%); conifer SRF (23%); broadleaf SRF 
(poplar, aspen) (12%); SRC willow (27%); miscanthus (25%). A high-level analysis of 
land availability has been undertaken, indicating that the Net Zero Strategy pathway 
deployment profile is feasible. To calculate carbon stocks, a simple linear approach to yield 
modelling has been adopted which could overestimate initial growth and thus abatement. 
For all crops, appropriate biomass expansion coefficients were applied to account for 
branches and/or roots, as appropriate. All biomass was converted to carbon, assuming 
carbon comprises 50% of biomass. Emissions savings are modelled as the time-averaged 
increase in biomass carbon stocks resulting from planting of the crop, assuming the land 
use change is permanent.
In addition, the 2050 scenarios assume a maximum technical potential of 53 kha domestic 
bioenergy crop planting rate by 2050. Bioresource import assumptions in 2050 do not 
exceed current levels of imports.
Forestry: Emissions/removals are estimated using output from Forest Research’s CSORT 
model, an off-line version of Carbine, the greenhouse gas accounting model used to 
calculate the forestry contribution to the UK LULUCF GHG inventory.106, 107 Three indicative 
woodland types are represented in the model: productive conifer, productive broadleaf, 
and unmanaged. The modelled abatement is for England only and adjusted to a UK basis 
to be broadly aligned to the CCC share of afforestation by country in the “Balanced Net 
Zero pathway” scenario.108 Linear expansion of deployment is assumed between 2025 
and 2035. Non-market benefits are calculated using various research, compatible with the 
Enabling a Natural Capital Approach services data book.109
The 2050 scenarios vary the maximum afforestation/tree planting rate assumptions 
between 30 kha (in the high electrification/innovation scenario) and 50 kha pa (in the high 
resource scenario). 
344 Technical Annex
Peatland: The peatland trajectory covers restoration as well as technical potential 
modelling covering abatement from responsible management and the ending of peat 
extraction. Emissions savings from peatland restoration are based on upland, lowland 
cropland and lowland grassland emissions factors, which are applied to the peatland 
restoration deployment profile, delivered via the Nature for Climate Fund and Blended 
finance up to 2050.110 The technical potential modelling covering responsible management 
measures (management activity that does not seek to re-establish peat habitats, but 
which significantly reduces the impact of using peatland for its current purpose) assumes 
abatement to be 1/3 of respective cropland/grassland restoration abatement. Biodiversity 
and water quality benefits are monetized using central values, whilst upfront restoration 
costs are estimated using 2017 Defra grant scheme data.111, 112 The peatland modelling 
from Defra is England only, including an early stage assessment of how emissions factors 
from wasted peat may be revised in future inventories. Abatement potential in DAs is 
assumed to be in line with CCC analysis.
Peatland assumptions are the same across the three 2050 scenarios and there are two 
separate evidence bases – one that covers England, and one that covers Scotland. 
Both evidence bases consist of a set of restoration measures characterised by cost and 
maximum technical potential to reduce emissions. Assumptions for England come from 
Defra but for Scotland, data comes from the Scottish TIMES model and are uplifted to 
account for Wales and Northern Ireland.
Resources and Waste: For municipal wastewater, water companies use the Carbon 
Accounting Workbook developed by UK Water Industry Research to estimate operational 
GHG emissions across the industry. The workbook has been in place since 2004 and 
is updated annually to reflect the needs of the industry, including changes in carbon 
accounting practices with updated emission factors to align with the latest UK and 
international data. There are no internal models for private or industrial emissions and 
there are still significant gaps in our understanding of the magnitude and main sources 
of these. The Water UK Routemap to 2030 sets out industry plans to achieve net zero by 
2030.113 This routemap has been used as the basis for Defra to develop net zero consistent 
policies, for example, using assumptions from industry on cost and feasibility of policy 
deployment.
For landfill emissions estimation, the Landfill Environmental and Financial (LEAF) model has 
been used. This was developed by Resource and Waste Solutions, and more detail can 
be found in their report.114 This is a high-level and strategic model of non-hazardous waste 
flows in England. LEAF allows the different scenarios to be described numerically and their 
effects on landfill emissions and costs of landfill to be calculated. The model considers the 
impacts of changes on landfill gas, leachate and void space consumption. The model is 
England only, but to provide an indication of Devolved Administration potential, emission 
savings are scaled to a UK level using relative emissions shares between England and the 
Devolved Administrations. It is assumed that there is a linear increase in diversion from 
landfill after 2021.
345Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
F-Gases: The Net Zero Strategy pathway for F-gas Emissions was estimated primarily 
using the UK-Level HFC Outlook Model developed by Gluckman Consulting. Non-HFC 
F-gas emissions are estimated using the BEIS Energy and Emissions Projections. The level 
of ambition for metered dose inhalers is derived from the ambition within the NHS report 
‘Delivering a ‘Net Zero’ National Health Service’.115 Costs were developed using the CCC 
report ‘Assessment of the potential to reduce UK F-gas emissions beyond the ambition of 
the F-gas Regulation and Kigali Amendment’.116 Uplift of HFC GWPs to AR5 with Carbon 
Cycle Feedback values was taken from BEIS Methodology.
Assumptions on maximum technical potential for resources, waste, and F-gases in the 
2050 scenarios are aligned with the sectoral evidence base for the pathway analysis.
Greenhouse Gas Removals
The engineered removals include the following technologies: Power Bionenergy with 
Carbon Capture and Storage (Power BECCS), Industry BECCS, Direct Air Carbon 
Capture and Storage (DACCS), and BECCS applications based on advanced gasification 
technologies (Hydrogen generation with waste, Hydrogen generation with biomass, 
Biofuels, Biogas, and Biomethane generation with CCS). Other engineered removals 
solutions, such as enhanced weathering, carbon-negative cements, ocean carbon 
sequestration and biochar have not been included in the modelling at this stage given the 
underlying uncertainty and need for further development. 
The pathway was developed through a combination of bottom-up sectoral modelling, 
as well as UKTM whole-system modelling. The pathway analysis (including build rates, 
energy demand, and costs) relied on assumptions from published sources on BECCS 
and DACCS, alongside a benchmarking study commissioned by BEIS.117, 118, 119, 120, 121 The 
study presented evidence based on an original review of the published literature, feedback 
received through the GGR Call for Evidence and additional stakeholder engagement.122
An investment lead-in time of four years is assumed for power BECCS, and five years for 
hydrogen BECCS and DACCS. Costs for power BECCS and hydrogen BECCS represent 
both the cost of generation (electricity/hydrogen) and of CO  removal. Power and hydrogen 
2
generation with BECCS are assumed to operate at baseload. DACCS is assumed to rely 
on low carbon energy inputs.
UKTM modelling for the 2050 scenarios uses the same technology assumptions as the 
pathway analysis where possible. In addition to the benchmarking study, assumptions on 
maximum technical potential and technology performance have been sourced from the 
sectoral models such as NZIP and from the Advanced Gasification Technology review.
346 Technical Annex
Supporting the transition across the economy 
Green Jobs, Skills and Industries 
Skills evidence presented in the Net Zero Strategy is largely drawn from the work carried 
out by the Green Jobs Taskforce and found in the published Green Jobs Taskforce 
report.123 The joint BEIS and DfE Ministerially led independent Taskforce included 
representatives from across business, trade unions and the skills/education sector and 
it was supported by a secretariat comprised of civil servants from BEIS and the DfE. 
The secretariat facilitated the drawing together of its evidence review and supported the 
Green Jobs Taskforce reviewing over 200 reports published by industry, academia, and 
government to form a robust evidence base upon which to build recommendations. The 
Annex published alongside the Green Jobs Taskforce brings together a wide range of 
information about how certain sectors, occupations, skills requirements and qualification 
levels (L)1 will change as the UK transitions to a net zero economy gathered by the 
secretariat.
Green Investment
Research referenced in the Green Investment chapter is drawn from external sources. 
This includes the Climate Change Committee’s The Road to Net Zero Finance, which was 
a report prepared by the Advisory Group on Finance to critically assess the UK financial 
systems ability to deliver net zero.124 This report provides an estimate for the total amount 
of capital investment needed in technologies to achieve net zero and therefore does not 
deliver a full picture of investment needs given the exclusion of operational costs.
Innovation for Net Zero
The published Energy Innovation Needs Assessments (EINAs) are the main source of 
evidence base underlying the innovation chapter.125 It is a whole system analysis used in 
understanding the sectors and innovations of highest potential benefit to the UK energy 
system. The analysis is based on cost optimisation modelling carried with the Energy 
System Modelling Environment (ESME), and extensive engagement with industry to 
shape input assumptions and guide technical specifications. The EINAs are split into 
twelve reports, each covering a group of similar technologies and exploring their potential 
impacts and current barriers to their innovation and deployment. Overall, the EINAs aid 
understanding of where innovation can help achieve the largest energy system cost 
reductions and business opportunities when on a net zero trajectory.
GVA figures used in this publication have been updated internally by BEIS using the same 
EINA methodology to reflect increased net zero ambition, as original EINA publications 
were on the basis of the previous 80% greenhouse gas reduction target.
347Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Local Climate Action
Analysis of local based decarbonisation policies is based on the Local Net Zero Model. 
The model takes assumptions from the ELENA programme, an EU fund which leverages 
public money for local based decarbonisation projects.126 These assumptions include the 
expected level of private funding leveraged, energy savings of projects and additionality. 
The model estimates the public costs, private costs, carbon savings and energy savings of 
expected projects resulting from the programme. 
Empowering the Public and Businesses to Make Green Choices
Much of the research contributing towards this chapter was part of BEIS’ Net Zero 
Societal Change Research Programme 2020-21. Components of the research programme 
that have fed into this chapter include: ‘Climate change and net zero: public awareness 
and perceptions’ (an online survey of circa 7,000 members of the UK public on public 
perceptions of climate change and net zero); ‘Net zero public dialogue’ (online workshops 
with the public exploring their understanding and perceptions of net zero); ‘Net Zero 
Societal Change Analysis Project’ (analysis carried out by Energy Systems Catapult 
exploring the potential impact of different societal changes in reaching net zero); and a 
research note entitled ‘Net zero public engagement and participation’.127, 128, 129, 130
Within the chapter, the ‘Principles underpinning green public and business choices’ 
section is drawn from ‘Net zero: principles for successful behaviour change initiatives’, a 
report BEIS commissioned from the Behavioural Insights Team.131 The chapter also uses 
findings from BEIS’ Public Attitudes Tracker surveys regarding people’s concern about 
climate change.132
Cross-cutting assumptions
Fuel prices: Fossil fuel price assumptions are based on the BEIS Fossil Fuel Prices 
Assumptions 2020, with the exception of UKTIMES analysis which uses the BEIS Fossil 
Fuel Prices Assumptions 2016.133
Carbon values: Carbon values apply a monetary value to emissions in policy appraisal 
and are based on a target-consistent approach. The latest 2021 HMG carbon values are 
consistent with the UK’s national and international climate commitments and represent an 
increase on previous values.134 Where cost benefit analysis of the sixth carbon budget from 
the Impact Assessment is quoted, the 2018 carbon values were used. These are consistent 
with the previous 80% emissions reduction target. To compensate for subsequent 
increased climate ambition, the high rather than central 2018 carbon values were used in 
the cost benefit analysis.135
348 Technical Annex
Economic growth and demography: The baseline for economic growth used for all 
analysis is consistent with the July 2020 OBR long term projections of economic growth.136 
When calculating the GDP carbon intensity and GDP energy intensity deployment 
assumptions, projections from the March 2021 Economic and fiscal outlook were used, for 
both short and long-term GDP forecasts.137
Air quality: Where air quality impacts have been quantified, they have been monetised in 
line with the national values of the most recent air quality damage costs.138
Discount rates: Discount rates are used in line with Green Book guidance.139 For appraisal 
periods up to 2050 the discount rate is 3.5%. A 2% cumulative annual health uplift is 
applied to air quality benefits prior to discounting, effectively reducing the discount 
rate to 1.5%.
Estimating jobs: The estimate of jobs delivered since the Ten Point Plan announcement 
is based on internal HMG analysis of employment impacts across a range of policies 
and programmes within the 10 Points of the Plan. The method for estimating the number 
of jobs supported by Net Zero Strategy policies and proposals in 2025 and 2030 is as 
follows. This varies by sector and in some cases by the period of analysis.
Power: Analysis aggregates projected employment across Power Networks, Offshore 
wind, Onshore wind, Solar, and Storage and demand side flexibility, all based on BEIS 
analysis using the EINA methodology and the technology deployment levels implied by the 
indicative delivery pathway (see Table 11). The 2030 figure also includes 10,000 jobs (peak 
employment) from the construction of a large nuclear plant. These estimates are based 
on the number employed directly in the power sector technologies, with the exception of 
offshore wind, which also includes indirect (supply chain) jobs based on a multiplier of 1 
direct job to 1 indirect job.
Fuel supply: The 2025 analysis is an estimate of potential employment by that year in a 
UK industry in Sustainable Aviation Fuels (SAF) (based on DfT analysis). The 2030 figure 
is an aggregation of anticipated employment by that year in SAF (based on DfT analysis), 
along with an estimate of potential employment in a UK hydrogen economy as set out in 
the Hydrogen Strategy.140 This is based on BEIS analysis of an updated model from the 
Energy Innovation Needs Assessment.
Industry: Analysis relates to estimated employment in the UK in Carbon Capture Utilisation 
and Storage (CCUS), calculated using the Energy Innovation Needs Assessments 
approach and pro-rated for 2025 based on the anticipated trajectory for the level of 
carbon captured through CCUS over the decade. These are high-level estimates and 
actual outturn of employment will depend on several factors, although the jobs estimate is 
considered broadly consistent with stated government policy for the development of the 
technology. These estimates cover both power CCUS and CCUS for industrial purposes, 
but are included in the Industry chapter as the estimates do not directly overlap with any 
estimates included in the Power chapter. 
349Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Heat and Buildings: Analysis aggregates anticipated employment impacts from the 
decarbonisation of heating (calculated using an update of the Energy Innovation Needs 
Assessments applied to the deployment levels set out in Table 11) and total public and 
private spending on energy efficiency measures (based on BEIS analysis using a jobs/
capex multiplier). These estimates are based on broad assumptions of the policy mix 
driving carbon savings from domestic buildings over the 2020s. As some of these policies 
are still not confirmed, there is large uncertainty over the exact timing and job numbers 
supported by them.
Transport: Both numbers are based on an aggregation of anticipated employment 
impacts from the Automotive Transformation Fund and the Advanced Propulsion Centre, 
along with anticipated levels of employment in active travel (cycling and walking), and rail 
decarbonisation. The active travel and rail decarbonisation estimates are based on DfT 
analysis of what policy ambitions for active travel and rail decarbonisation are likely to 
imply for employment in their respective sectors in these years. 
Natural Resources, Waste and F-gases: These numbers relate exclusively to direct 
employment in the UK forestry sector and are based on Defra analysis. These estimates 
exclude indirect jobs, such as those supported in tourism, the wider forestry supply chain 
or local farming. Employment in forestry will be supported by policies such as the Nature 
for Climate Fund. This number does not include potential employment in other areas 
covered in the chapter such as peat restoration, sustainable agriculture or waste recycling.
Public and private investment estimates 
Public investment figures in the strategy refer to sums of government spend committed 
to a relevant Budgets and Spending Reviews, unless otherwise stated. Private investment 
estimates are derived through analysis of how much private sector spend is likely to be 
leveraged from this public spend. Further public and private investment will be delivered 
as proposals are developed into firm policies. Analysis of the potential GVA generated 
by decarbonisation has been conducted for a subset of sectors: power, renewables, 
heat and buildings, industry, CCUS, hydrogen, smart systems and road transport. The 
analysis follows the methodology developed by Vivid Economics for the Energy Innovation 
Needs Assessment in 2019.141 Where possible, it uses whole energy systems modelling to 
estimate domestic economic opportunities from achieving net zero in the UK in 2050 and, 
while export opportunities rely on a global scenario limiting global warming to two degrees 
Celsius above pre-industrial levels.
350 Technical Annex
Endnotes
1  UK Legislation (2008), ‘Climate Change Act 2008’, https://www.legislation.gov.uk/
ukpga/2008/27/contents
2  CCC (2019), ‘Net Zero – The UK’s contribution to stopping global warming’, https://www.
theccc.org.uk/publication/net-zero-the-uks-contribution-to-stopping-global-warming/
3  See in particular sections 13, 14 and 15 of the Act.
4   BEIS (2021), ‘2019 UK greenhouse gas emissions: final figures - statistical release’, https://
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/957887/2019_Final_greenhouse_gas_emissions_statistical_release.pdf
5  UNFCCC (2015), ‘Paris Agreement’, https://unfccc.int/sites/default/files/english_paris_
agreement.pdf
6  Excluding international aviation and shipping emissions.
7  BEIS (2021), ‘Annual statements of emissions’, https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/
annual-statements-of-emissions
8  BEIS (2021), UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory, 1990-2019, https://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/reports/
cat09/2105061125_ukghgi-90-19_Main_Issue_1.pdf
9  UK Legislation (2021), ‘The Carbon Accounting (Provision for 2019) Regulations 2021’,  
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2021/189/made?view=plain
10  BEIS (2021), ‘UK Greenhouse Gas Inventory’, 1990-2019, https://www.gov.uk/government/
statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-to-2019
11  IPCC (2013), ‘Supplement to the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories: Wetlands’, https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/03/Wetlands_
Supplement_Entire_Report.pdf
12  IPCC (2007), ‘Assessment Report 4’ WGI Chapter 2, table 2.14, https://www.ipcc.ch/
publications_and_data/ar4/wg1/en/ch2s2-10-2.html
13  IPCC (2013), ‘Assessment Report 5’ WGI Chapter 8, table 8.A.1 and 8.SM.16, https://www.
ipcc.ch/report/ar5/syr/
14  UNFCCC (2018), ‘Modalities, procedures and guidelines’, Annex II, Metrics 
https://ledslac.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/e.-Decision-18-cma.1.pdf
15  IPCC (2021), ‘Assessment report 6’ WGI table 7.15, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/
16  UK Legislation (2016), ‘Carbon Budget Order 2016 impact assessment’,  
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/en/ukdsi/2016/9780111147825/impacts
17  The UK may also purchase international credits to contribute to its carbon budgets. We 
assume that no such credits are purchased for the purposes of this analysis.
351Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
18  BEIS (2020), ‘Updated energy and emissions projections: 2019’, 2020, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/updated-energy-and-emissions-projections-2019
19  BEIS (2020), ‘Updated energy and emissions projections: 2019’, Annex A: Greenhouse gas 
emissions by source, 2020, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/931200/Annex-A-greenhouse-gas-emissions-by-
source__EEP2019_.ods
20  OBR (2020), ‘Fiscal sustainability report’, Chapter 2, July 2020, https://obr.uk/download/fiscal-
sustainability-report-july-2020/
21  Figure 1 shows EEP 2019 which for comparability has been adjusted for accounting changes, 
namely including Wetlands brought in under the 2019 inventory (c.15 mt per year) and 
converting the projections into AR5 with Feedback
22  EEP19 has been adjusted for accounting changes, namely including Wetlands brought in 
under the 2019 inventory, including IAS emissions, and converting the projections into AR5 
with feedback.
23  BEIS (2021), ‘2020 UK greenhouse gas emissions’, provisional figures, 2021, https://
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/
file/972583/2020_Provisional_emissions_statistics_report.pdf
24  OBR (2020), ‘Fiscal sustainability report, July 2020’, https://obr.uk/download/fiscal-
sustainability-report-july-2020/
25  BEIS (2019), ‘Energy Innovation Needs Assessment’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/energy-innovation-needs-assessments
26  BEIS (2019), ‘Energy Innovation Needs Assessment’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/energy-innovation-needs-assessments
27  UCL, ‘UK TIMES’, https://www.ucl.ac.uk/energy-models/models/uk-times
28  The model takes account of the direct cost of purchasing, installing, running and maintaining 
the abatement technologies. The cost of purchasing and installing includes assumed capital 
costs and the cost of borrowing to pay for the capital. Running costs include the cost of energy 
supplies, both domestic and any imports.
29  UK Legislation (2021), ‘Carbon Budget Order 2021 impact assessment’, https://www.
legislation.gov.uk/ukia/2021/18/pdfs/ukia_20210018_en.pdf
30  UK Legislation (2021), ‘Carbon Budget Order 2021 impact assessment’, https://www.
legislation.gov.uk/ukia/2021/18/pdfs/ukia_20210018_en.pdf
31  BEIS (2020), ‘Updated energy and emissions projections: 2019’ Annex D: Policy savings in the 
projections (revised December 2020), https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/947604/Annex-D-policy-savings_revised_
Dec2020__EEP2019_.ods
32  This range is provisional. The Secretary of State will lay before Parliament a report setting out a 
finalised indicative annual range as soon as is reasonably practicable.
352 Technical Annex
33  BEIS (2019), ‘Updated energy and emissions projections 2018’, Chapter 6 Uncertainty 
in emissions projections, 2019, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/794590/updated-energy-and-emissions-
projections-2018.pdf
34  IAS emissions increase the width of the range by 7.1mt on average over CB6, and the 
additional LULUCF emissions increase the width by 11.8 mt. Both ranges are symmetrical.
35  Whilst sectors are characterised by different sources and magnitudes of uncertainty, we have 
made the simplifying assumption that uncertainty in 2020 is +3.7%/-3.5% in each sector, 
broadly in line with the economy wide average. The proportional up-/down-lift applied to 
produce the rage increases by +0.35%/-0.17% in each subsequent year, again in line with the 
economy wide average.
36  AR5 without feedback modelling undertaken for Agriculture, F-gases, Fuel Supply, LULUCF 
and Waste. Heat & Buildings, International Aviation and Shipping, Industry, Power, Removals 
and Transport all contain very small amounts of non-CO2 gases and pathways are assumed 
invariant to GWP.
37  For the Natural Resources, Waste and F-gases sector, illustrative costs for Forestry, Peat and 
Wastewater in the Devolved Nations have been included by assuming they are line with those 
set out in CCC estimates. BEIS Analysis, CCC 6th Carbon Budget Report https://www.theccc.
org.uk/publication/sixth-carbon-budget/
38  UK Legislation (2021), ‘Carbon Budget Order 2021 impact assessment’, https://www.
legislation.gov.uk/ukia/2021/18/pdfs/ukia_20210018_en.pdf
39  This figure was based on outdated 2018 carbon values, with the ‘high’ series used to 
compensated for anticipated increases in new carbon values: https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/updated-short-term-traded-carbon-values-used-for-uk-policy-appraisal-2018
40  OBR (2021), ‘Fiscal risks report’, https://obr.uk/frr/fiscal-risks-report-july-2021/
41  HMT (2021), ‘Net Zero Review’
42  BEIS (2019), ‘Energy Innovation Needs Assessment’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/energy-innovation-needs-assessments
43  European Commission Free allocation of allowances in the EU ETS, https://ec.europa.eu/clima/
policies/ets/allowances_en
44  BEIS, Free allocation of allowances in the UK ETS, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/participating-in-the-uk-ets/participating-in-the-uk-ets#free-allocation
45  HMT (2021), ‘Net Zero Review’
46  OBR (2021), ‘Fiscal risks report, July 2021’, Chapter 3, https://obr.uk/download/fiscal-risks-
report-july-2021/
47  BEIS , Prime Minister’s office, 10 Downing Street, The Rt Hon Alok Sharma MP & The Rt Hon 
Boris Johnson MP (2020), ‘The Ten Point Plan for a Green Industrial Revolution’, https://www.
gov.uk/government/publications/the-ten-point-plan-for-a-green-industrial-revolution
353Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
48  Natural Capital Committee (2020), ‘The Green Book guidance: embedding natural capital into 
public policy appraisal – November 2020 Update, 2020’, https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/937652/ncc-green-book-
advice.pdf
49  HMT (2013), ‘The Green Book: appraisal and evaluation of central government’, paragraph 
6.50, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-green-book-appraisal-and-evaluation-
in-central-governent
50  Defra (2021), ‘Enabling a Natural Capital Approach (ENCA)’, https://www.gov.uk/guidance/
enabling-a-natural-capital-approach-enca
51  See https://www.gov.uk/government/groups/natural-capital-committee The Natural Capital 
Committee is an independent advisory body, set up in 2012. It provides advice to the 
government on the state of England’s natural capital; our natural assets include forests, rivers, 
land, minerals and ocean
52  Cambridge Conservation Initiative, ‘Natural Capital Coalition’ (2016), https://
naturalcapitalcoalition.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/CCI-Natural-Capital-Paper-July-2016-
low-res.pdf
53  ONS (2020), ‘UK natural capital accounts 2020’, https://www.ons.gov.uk/economy/
environmentalaccounts/datasets/uknaturalcapitalaccounts2020
54  International Resource Panel (2020), ‘Global Resources Outlook 2019: Natural Resources for 
the Future We Want’, https://www.resourcepanel.org/reports/global-resources-outlook
55  For further background on the DDM, please see https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
dynamic-dispatch-model-ddm
56  BEIS (2020), ‘Modelling 2050: electricity system analysis, 2020’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/modelling-2050-electricity-system-analysis
57  CCC (2020), ‘The Sixth Carbon Budget: Electricity generation’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2020/12/Sector-summary-Electricity-generation.pdf
58  BEIS (2020), Electricity Generation Costs, 2020, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
beis-electricity-generation-costs-2020
59  BEIS (2020), ‘Modelling 2050: electricity system analysis’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/modelling-2050-electricity-system-analysis
60  BEIS (2021), ‘UK Hydrogen Strategy, 2021’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-
hydrogen-strategy
61  BEIS (2021), ‘Hydrogen analytical annex, 2021’, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1011499/Hydrogen_Analytical_
Annex.pdf
62  BEIS (2021), Hydrogen analytical annex, 2021, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1011499/Hydrogen_Analytical_
Annex.pdf 
354 Technical Annex
63  BEIS (2019), ‘Oil and gas: Environmental and Emissions Monitoring System database’, https://
www.gov.uk/guidance/oil-and-gas-eems-database
64  Element Energy (2020), ‘Deep-Decarbonisation Pathways for UK Industry, Element Energy, 
2020’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/deep-decarbonisation-pathways-for-uk-industry-
element-energy/
65  CCC (2020), ‘Sixth Carbon Budget report’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/sixth-
carbon-budget/
66  BEIS (2021), ‘Industrial decarbonisation strategy’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/industrial-decarbonisation-strategy
67  BEIS (2017), ‘National Household Model, 2017’, https://data.gov.uk/dataset/957eadbe-43b6-
4d8d-b931-8594cb346ecd/national-household-model
68  BRE Group (2012), ‘Standard Assessment Procedure’, https://www.bregroup.com/sap/
standard-assessment-procedure-sap-2012/
69  MHCLG (2021), ‘English Housing Survey’: https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/english-
housing-survey
70  BEIS (2017), ‘Domestic cost assumptions – what does it cost to retrofit homes’: https://www.
gov.uk/government/publications/domestic-cost-assumptions-what-does-it-cost-to-retrofit-
homes
71  (BEIS 2019), ‘Determining the costs of insulating non-standard cavity walls and lofts’: https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/determining-the-costs-of-insulating-non-standard-
cavity-walls-and-lofts
72  BEIS (2016),’Building Energy Efficiency Survey’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
building-energy-efficiency-survey-bees
73  BEIS (2016), ‘Building Energy Efficiency Survey’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
building-energy-efficiency-survey-bees
74  BEIS (2021), ‘Digest of UK Energy Statistics’, https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/
digest-of-uk-energy-statistics-dukes
75  BEIS (2020), ‘Energy and Emissions Projections’, https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/
energy-and-emissions-projections
76  BEIS (2020), ‘Energy Consumption in the UK’, https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/
energy-consumption-in-the-uk
77  BEIS (2021),’Non-domestic National Energy Efficiency Data Framework’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/statistics/non-domestic-national-energy-efficiency-data-framework-nd-need-2020
78  BEIS (2020), ‘Cost of installing heating measures in domestic properties’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/cost-of-installing-heating-measures-in-domestic-properties
79  BEIS (2017), ‘Detailed analysis of data from heat pumps installed via the Renewable Heat 
Premium Payment Scheme (RHPP)’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/detailed-
analysis-of-data-from-heat-pumps-installed-via-the-renewable-heat-premium-payment-
scheme-rhpp
355Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
80  BEIS (2020), ‘Heat pump manufacturing supply chain research project’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/heat-pump-manufacturing-supply-chain-research-project
81  BEIS (2017), ‘National Household Model’, https://data.gov.uk/dataset/957eadbe-43b6-4d8d-
b931-8594cb346ecd/national-household-model
82  BEIS (2021), ‘National Energy Efficiency Data-Framework (NEED)’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/collections/national-energy-efficiency-data-need-framework
83  MHCLG (2019), ‘The Future Homes Standard consultation impact assessment’, https://www.
gov.uk/government/publications/the-future-homes-standard-consultation-impact-assessment
84  BEIS (2021), ‘National Energy Efficiency Data-Framework (NEED)’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/collections/national-energy-efficiency-data-need-framework
85  BEIS (2021), ‘Non-domestic National Energy Efficiency Data-Framework (ND-NEED)’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/collections/non-domestic-national-energy-efficiency-data-framework-
nd-need
86  Element Energy (2021), ‘Development of trajectories for residential heat decarbonisation to 
inform the Sixth Carbon Budget (Element Energy)’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/
development-of-trajectories-for-residential-heat-decarbonisation-to-inform-the-sixth-carbon-
budget-element-energy/
87  BEIS (2021), ‘Digest of UK Energy Statistics (DUKES)’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
collections/digest-of-uk-energy-statistics-dukes
88  BEIS (2021), ‘Opportunity areas for district heating networks in the UK: second National 
Comprehensive Assessment, 2021’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/opportunity-
areas-for-district-heating-networks-in-the-uk-second-national-comprehensive-assessment
89  BEIS (2015), ‘Assessment of the Costs, Performance and Characteristics of UK Heat 
Networks, 2015’, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/
uploads/attachment_data/file/424254/heat_networks.pdf
90  BEIS (2019), ‘Heat Networks Investment Project (HNIP) pilot scheme, 2019’, https://www.gov.
uk/government/publications/heat-networks-investment-project-hnip
91  This model is based on historic RHI data.
92  Assumptions for this model drawn from Bioenergy Heat Pathways to 2050 Rapid Evidence 
Assessment, Ecofys & E4Tech (for BEIS) 2018, unpublished.
93  These are consistent with those used to compile the 1990-2019 National Atmospheric 
Emissions Inventory (NAEI).
94  BEIS (2021), ‘Green Book supplementary guidance: valuation of energy use and greenhouse 
gas emissions for appraisal’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/valuation-of-energy-
use-and-greenhouse-gas-emissions-for-appraisal
95  AHDB (2021), ‘Great Britain fertiliser prices’, https://ahdb.org.uk/GB-fertiliser-prices
96  BEIS (2020), ‘Future support for low carbon heat, 2021’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
consultations/future-support-for-low-carbon-heat
356 Technical Annex
97  DFT (2021), ‘Decarbonising transport: a better, greener Britain’, https://assets.publishing.
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1009448/
decarbonising-transport-a-better-greener-britain.pdf
98  DFT (2020), ‘Transport appraisal and modelling tools’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
collections/transport-appraisal-and-modelling-tools
99  DfT (2020), ‘Jet Zero consultation: Evidence and analysis’, https://assets.publishing.service.
gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1002163/jet-zero-
consultation-evidence-and-analysis.pdf
100 DfT (2017), ‘UK Aviation Forecasts’, https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/878705/uk-aviation-forecasts-2017.pdf
101 UMAS, E4Tech, Frontier Economics, CE Delft (2019), ‘Reducing the Maritime Sector’s 
Contribution to Climate Change and Air Pollution. Scenario Analysis: Take-up of Emissions 
Reduction Options and their Impacts on Emissions and Costs. A Report for the Department for 
Transport’  
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/816018/scenario-analysis-take-up-of-emissions-reduction-options-impacts-on-
emissions-costs.pdf
102 BEIS (2021), ‘Final UK greenhouse gas emissions national statistics 1990 to 2019’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-
1990-to-2019
103 For example, the estimates of the greenhouse gas emissions from international shipping 
represent estimates of the greenhouse gas emissions from fuel sold in the UK for use in 
international shipping.
104 BEIS (2021), ‘Advanced Gasification Technologies Review and Benchmarking: summary 
report’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/advanced-gasification-technologies-
review-and-benchmarking
105 Defra (2021), ‘Delivering Clean Growth Througfh Sustainable Intensification Project’. To be 
published in 2021.
106 Morison et al. (2012), ‘Understanding the carbon and greenhouse gas balance of forests 
in Britain’, https://www.forestresearch.gov.uk/research/understanding-the-carbon-and-
greenhouse-gas-balance-of-forests-in-britain/.
107 Matthews, Broadmeadow (2009), ‘The potential of UK forestry to contribute to 
government’s emissions reduction commitments’, https://www.cabdirect.org/cabdirect/
abstract/20103082977
108 CCC (2020),’Sixth carbon budget: Agriculture & land use, land-use change & forestry 
(LULUCF)’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/12/Sector-summary-
Agriculture-land-use-land-use-change-forestry.pdf
109 Defra (2021), ‘ENCA services databook’, https://www.gov.uk/guidance/enabling-a-natural-
capital-approach-enca#enca-services-databook
110 Evans et al. (2017), ‘Implementation of an Emissions Inventory for UK Peatlands’, https://uk-air.
defra.gov.uk/library/reports?report_id=980
357Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
111 Christie et al. (2011), ‘An economic assessment of the ecosystem service benefits derived from 
the SSSI biodiversity conservation policy in England and Wales’, https://www.sciencedirect.
com/science/article/pii/S2212041612000095
112 Morris, Camino (2011), ‘Economic Assessment of Freshwater, Wetland and 
Floodplain (FWF) Ecosystem Services’, http://uknea.unep-wcmc.org/LinkClick.
aspx?fileticket=lVLEq%2BxAI%2BQ%3D&tabid
113 Water UK (2020), ‘Net Zero 2030 Routemap’, https://www.water.org.uk/routemap2030/
114 Resources and Waste Solutions (2019), ‘Financial Costs of Current and 
Future Landfill Operations’, http://sciencesearch.defra.gov.uk/Default.
aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&Completed=0&ProjectID=20309
115 NHS England (2020), ‘Delivery a Net Zero National Health Service’, https://www.england.nhs.
uk/greenernhs/wp-content/uploads/sites/51/2020/10/delivering-a-net-zero-national-health-
service.pdf
116 Ricardo and Gluckman Consulting (2019), ‘Assessment of potential to reduce UK F-gas 
emissions’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/assessment-of-potential-to-reduce-uk-f-
gas-emissions-ricardo-and-gluckman-consulting/
117 Gas Turbine World (2015), GTW 2014-2015 Handbook, Volume 31, https://gasturbineworld.
com/shop/annual-handbook/2014-15-handbook-volume-31/
118 Ricardo (2019), ‘Analysing the potential of bioenergy with carbon capture in the UK to 2050’,  
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/the-potential-of-bioenergy-with-carbon-capture
119 BEIS & Wood Plc (2018), ‘Assessing the Cost Reduction Potential and Competitiveness of 
Novel (Next Generation) UK Carbon Capture Technology, Benchmarking State-of-the-art and 
Next Generation Technologies, Revision 4A’,  
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_
data/file/864688/BEIS_Final_Benchmarks_Report_Rev_4A.pdf
120 NAS (2018), ‘Negative Emission Technologies and Reliable Sequestration: A Research 
Agenda’, https://www.nap.edu/catalog/25259/negative-emissions-technologies-and-reliable-
sequestration-a-research-agenda
121 Element Energy and UK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology (2021), ‘Greenhouse Gas Removal 
Methods and Their Potential UK Deployment’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/
greenhouse-gas-removal-methods-technology-assessment-report
122 BEIS (2020), ‘Greenhouse gas removals: call for evidence’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
consultations/greenhouse-gas-removals-call-for-evidence
123 Green Jobs Taskforce (2021), ‘Report to the Government, Industry and Skills Sectors’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/green-jobs-taskforce-report
124 CCC (2020), ‘The Road to Net-Zero Finance’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/publication/the-road-
to-net-zero-finance-sixth-carbon-budget-advisory-group/
125 BEIS (2019), ‘Energy Innovation Needs Assessment’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/energy-innovation-needs-assessments
358 Technical Annex
126 European Investment Bank (2021), ‘ELENA – Completed Project Factsheets’, https://www.eib.
org/en/products/advising/elena/completed-projects/index.htm
127 BEIS (2021), ‘Climate change and net zero: public awareness and perceptions’, https://
www.gov.uk/government/publications/climate-change-and-net-zero-public-awareness-and-
perceptions
128 BEIS (2021), ‘Net zero public dialogue’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/net-zero-
public-dialogue
129 BEIS, Defra (2021), ‘Net Zero Societal Change Analysis Project’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/net-zero-societal-change-analysis-project
130 BEIS (2021), ‘Net zero public engagement and participation’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/net-zero-public-engagement-and-participation
131 Behavioural Insights Team (2021), ‘Net zero: principles for successful behaviour change 
initiatives’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/net-zero-principles-for-successful-
behaviour-change-initiatives
132 BEIS (2021), ‘BEIS Public Attitudes Tracker’, https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/
public-attitudes-tracking-survey
133 BEIS (2020), ‘Fossil fuel price assumptions’, https://www.gov.uk/government/collections/fossil-
fuel-price-assumptions
134 BEIS (2021), ‘Green Book supplementary guidance: valuation of energy use and greenhouse 
gas emissions for appraisal’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/valuation-of-energy-
use-and-greenhouse-gas-emissions-for-appraisal
135 BEIS (2018), ‘Update to traded carbon values: 2018’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
collections/carbon-valuation--2#update-to-traded-carbon-values:-2018
136 OBR (2020), ‘Fiscal sustainability report – July 2020’, https://obr.uk/fsr/fiscal-sustainability-
report-july-2020/
137 OBR (2021), ‘Economic and fiscal outlook report – March 2021’, https://obr.uk/efo/economic-
and-fiscal-outlook-march-2021/
138 Defra (2021), ‘Air quality appraisal: damage cost guidance’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/assess-the-impact-of-air-quality
139 HMT (2013), ‘Green Book supplementary guidance: discounting’, https://www.gov.uk/
government/publications/green-book-supplementary-guidance-discounting
140 BEIS (2021), ‘UK Hydrogen Strategy’, https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/uk-
hydrogen-strategy
141 BEIS (2019), ‘Energy Innovation Needs Assessments’, https://www.gov.uk/government/
publications/energy-innovation-needs-assessments
359Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Climate 
Science 
Annex361Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Climate Science Annex
Why we must act
Science is clear that the world is warming,  There is still uncertainty over the 
that this is occurring because of human  responsiveness of global temperatures to 
activity, and that left unchecked, continued  GHG emissions; the Intergovernmental Panel 
warming would be deeply harmful, not just to  on Climate Change (IPCC) estimate that a 
the natural world, but also to human security  doubling of pre-industrial CO  levels would 
2
and wellbeing. Global average temperatures  result in warming in a range of 2.5°C – 4°C.12 
have already risen by around 1.1°C1 and 2020  The higher that temperatures rise, the greater 
concluded the earth’s warmest 10-year period  the risk of seeing dangerous low-likelihood, 
on record.2 Without action to reduce the level  high-impact outcomes. These could include 
of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions emitted  abrupt responses and tipping points such as 
globally down to net zero, climate change is  dieback of the Amazon Rainforest, melting of 
set to continue with increasing temperatures  the polar ice sheets, and the collapse of key 
across the world.3 ocean currents controlling global weather, 
which cannot be ruled out.13, 14 To avoid these 
We are already seeing the impacts of climate 
risks, strong and decisive action is needed 
change across all parts of the world, with 
to reduce GHG emissions. Limiting further 
many types of extreme weather becoming 
warming decreases the likelihood of more 
more frequent and more intense – causing 
severe and potentially irreversible impacts on 
droughts, wildfires and flooding.4 The North 
people and ecosystems. Action would also 
American heatwave in June 2021, which 
provide other co-benefits, such as limiting the 
broke temperature records by over 4°C and 
rate of ocean acidification and improving air 
reached 49.6°C in Canada, would have been 
quality. Every additional fraction of a degree of 
virtually impossible without climate change.5 
global warming counts – with every 0.5°C of 
The melting of glaciers and ice sheets is 
warming there are clearly discernible increases 
accelerating, with sea levels currently rising at 
in the intensity of and frequency of impacts.15 
3.7mm annually.6 In the UK we can see a trend 
This is why we should aim to reduce global 
towards warmer and wetter winters, along 
emissions to net zero as quickly as is 
with hotter summers.7
practically possible.16
These changes are damaging the land and 
oceans that support human society and 
the natural environment. As a result, many 
species are being driven closer to extinction,8 
food supplies are being disrupted,9 and 
the health and livelihood of people across 
the world are being affected.10 Climate 
change disproportionally affects poor and 
disadvantaged people, with rural, coastal, 
and indigenous communities facing greater 
risks from impacts such as rising sea levels, 
drought, and food shortages.11
362 Climate Science Annex
Global temperature goals and emissions pathways
Rapid and deep cuts to emissions are  It is worth noting that these assessments 
essential to avoid the most dangerous  use different assumptions regarding both the 
impacts of climate change.17 Greenhouse  extent to which countries will meet their NDCs 
gas concentrations and global temperatures  and, crucially, the actions that will be taken by 
will continue to rise until we reduce GHG  countries to reduce their emissions after 2030. 
emissions to net zero.18 In 2015 the Paris  The latter will be a key determinant of whether 
Agreement was signed, where 196 parties  the world will meet the long-term global 
committed to hold “the increase in the  temperature goal.
global average temperature to well below 
The Climate Action Tracker (CAT)19 estimates 
two degrees above pre-industrial levels and 
that if there were a continuation of the 
to pursue efforts to limit the temperature 
currently implemented global policies these 
increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, 
set us on course for a global average 
recognising that this would significantly reduce 
temperature rise of 2.1°C to 3.9°C by the 
the risks and impacts of climate change”. The 
end of the century. But if currently pledged 
Agreement recognised that, to achieve this 
ambitions (i.e. those not yet implemented 
goal, global emissions of greenhouse gases 
into tangible policies) are implemented this 
would need to peak as soon as possible, 
range decreases to 1.9°C to 3.0°C, with a 
reduce rapidly thereafter, and reach a net zero 
mid-range estimate of 2.4°C. These estimates 
level in the second half of this century. 
are also consistent with projections in the UN 
As part of the Paris Agreement, countries also  Environment Programme’s 2020 Emissions 
committed to reduce or limit their greenhouse  Gap Report.20 Whilst these assessments 
gas emissions. These commitments are  show that current NDCs can have a significant 
contained in their Nationally Determined  impact on projected temperature rises, 
Contributions (NDCs). A number of studies  greater action is still needed if we are to 
have assessed how close these commitments  limit global temperature increases to well 
bring us to staying below two degrees. below two degrees.
Adaptation in the UK
Responding to the complexity of climate  To prepare for these eventualities, the UK is 
change demands a multifaceted approach.  already considering climate risks and what 
Regardless of global success in reducing  actions will be required through its five-
GHG emissions, some future temperature  yearly policy cycle of a Climate Change Risk 
rises are already locked in by historical  Assessment followed by a National Adaptation 
emissions up to the present day. Even the  Programme (NAP). The Government’s Third 
most optimistic, ambitious emission reduction  Climate Change Risk Assessment will be 
scenarios suggest approximately 0.5°C of  published in January 2022 and will outline 
further warming by mid-century compared to  Government views on the key risks and 
the present day.21 Furthermore, future global  opportunities the UK will face from climate 
emissions pathways are highly uncertain, so it  change. The Climate Change Committee’s 
is essential that the UK’s adaptive capacity is  2021 Independent Assessment of UK Climate 
rapidly developed to prepare for, and bolster 
our resilience to, the inevitable near-term and 
potential future impacts of climate change.
363Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Risk identified eight risk areas that will require  •  Risks to people and the economy from 
the most urgent attention in the next two  climate-related failure of the power system
years.22 These are applicable even if global 
•  Risks to human health, wellbeing and 
warming is limited to 1.5°C. 
productivity from increased exposure to 
heat in homes and other buildings
•  Risks to the viability and diversity of 
terrestrial and freshwater habitats and  •  Multiple risks to the UK from climate 
species from multiple hazards change impacts overseas
•  Risks to soil health from increased 
The NAP is a cross-department collaboration, 
flooding and drought
bringing together government’s policies 
•  Risks to natural carbon stores and  on managing climate risks in one place. 
sequestration from multiple hazards  The second NAP sets out how we will 
leading to increased emissions address climate risks for the period 2018 to 
2023, including risks to terrestrial, coastal, 
•  Risks to crops, livestock and commercial 
marine, and freshwater ecosystems, soils 
trees from multiple hazards
and biodiversity; and flooding and coastal 
•  Risks to supply of food, good and vital 
change risks to communities, businesses 
services due to climate-related collapse of 
and infrastructure.
supply chains and distribution networks
Future developments in climate science
In recent years the debate and focus of  •  What current weather and climate 
scientific research has shifted from whether  risks and impacts are expected 
climate change is happening and/or is being  globally and in the UK?
caused by human activity, to the range of 
•  What are the future risks and impacts from 
the expected impacts and the level of action 
weather and climate that we need to avoid 
required to address climate change through 
or need to adapt to?
a combination of adaptation and mitigation. 
•  What are the carbon budget and 
We need to better understand the nature, 
mitigation scenarios that will avoid the 
magnitude and rate of climate change. 
most dangerous impacts of global 
Preparing for unavoidable changes to the 
climate change?
climate will require more local analysis and 
more information on how global warming  •  What impacts and opportunities from 
relates to local-scale changes in weather  mitigation and adaptation actions are 
and climate extremes. Further research is  needed to proceed towards a resilient and 
also needed around stronger mitigation  net zero future?
actions to inform climate policy that can get 
The UK has also recently committed 
us to net zero.
£1.2 billion of funding to develop a new  
Our knowledge has increased significantly but  state-of-the-art supercomputer for the Met 
many key research priorities remain, including  Office. This will help ensure government, 
deepening our understanding around the  industry and communities are better prepared 
four questions Government posed to the Met  for the impacts from a changing climate 
Office this year.23 through increased amounts of data. Examples 
include the provision of very detailed localised 
climate information to improve city planning 
and public transport infrastructure.
364 Climate Science Annex
Climate science continues to rapidly improve 
and develop. This year saw the publication of 
the Working Group I (WGI) contribution to the 
IPCC’s Sixth Assessment Report (AR6). The 
report addresses the most up-to-date physical 
understanding of the climate system and 
climate change, bringing together the latest 
advances in climate science. WGII and WGIII 
contributions to AR6 will be published in 2022 
and respectively cover the impacts of climate 
change on people and nature, and the options 
for reducing GHG emissions and removing 
GHG from the atmosphere.
The main conclusions of WGI are a 
reinforcement of the consensus on climate 
science: that there is absolutely no doubt that 
human activities have warmed the planet and 
are causing widespread and rapid changes 
to the climate. Without immediate and drastic 
action, the impacts will be more severe and 
frequent. It shows that we are already feeling 
the effects of climate change and know that 
some changes to the planet are already 
irreversible on timescales of centuries to 
millennia. However, with immediate, concerted 
action to reduce emissions now, the worst 
impacts can still be averted. Technologies 
to remove CO  directly from the atmosphere 
2
or ocean can also help, but to adhere to the 
temperature goal of the Paris Agreement 
ambitious action on emission reductions is still 
required, and is needed today.
365Net Zero Strategy: Build Back Greener
Endnotes
1  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Paragraph A.1.2, Summary for Policymakers, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM
2  Met Office (2021), ‘2020 ends earth’s warmest 10 years on record’, https://www.metoffice.gov.
uk/about-us/press-office/news/weather-and-climate/2021/2020-ends-earths-warmest-10-
years-on-record
3  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Paragraph D.1.1, Summary for Policymakers, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM
4  PCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Paragraph A.3.2 and A.3.5, Summary for 
Policymakers, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM
5  Philip, S. Y. et al (2021), ‘Rapid attribution analysis of the extraordinary heatwave on 
the Pacific Coast of the US and Canada’, https://www.ecodebate.com.br/wp-content/
uploads/2021/07/20210707-rapid-attribution-analysis-of-the-extraordinary-heatwave-on-the-
pacific-coast-of-the-us-and-canada-june-2021.pdf
6  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Paragraph A.4.3 and A.1.7, Summary for 
Policymakers, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM
7  Kendon, M. et al (2021), ‘State of the UK Climate 2020’, https://rmets.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/
doi/10.1002/joc.7285
8  PCC (2019), Special Report on Climate Change and Land, Section 2.2.4, Chapter 2, Food 
Security, Land-Climate interactions, https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/
9  IPCC (2019), Special Report on Climate Change and Land, Chapter 5 Executive Summary, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/
10  IPCC (2019), Special Report on Climate Change and Land, Chapter 5 Executive Summary, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/srccl/
11  IPCC (2018), IPCC Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C, Chapter 3 Section 3.5.2.3 and 
Paragraph B5.1 Summary for Policymakers, https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/
12  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Paragraph A.4.4 Summary for Policymakers, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM
13  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Paragraph C.3.2, Summary for Policymakers, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM
366 Climate Science Annex
14  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Box TS.9, Technical Summary, https://www.ipcc.
ch/report/ar6/wg1/#TS
15  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Paragraph B.2.2, Summary for Policymakers, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM
16  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Paragraph D.1, Summary for Policymakers, 
https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM
17  Lowe, J. et al (2019), ‘Links between emissions pathways and time lags in Earth’s climate 
system’, https://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2019/07/Briefing-note-on-time-lags-
in-the-climate-system-Met-Office.pdf
18  PCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Paragraph B.1 and D.1 Summary for 
Policymakers, https://www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#SPM
19  Climate Action Tracker (2021), ‘Warming Projections Global Update May 2021’, https://
climateactiontracker.org/documents/853/CAT_2021-05-04_Briefing_Global-Update_Climate-
Summit-Momentum.pdf
20  UNEP (2020), ‘Emissions Gap Report 2020’, https://www.unep.org/emissions-gap-
report-2020
21  IPCC (2021), ‘Working Group I Contribution to the IPCC 6th Assessment Report, Climate 
Change 2021: The Physical Science Basis’, Box TS.1 and Table 1, Technical Summary, https://
www.ipcc.ch/report/ar6/wg1/#TS
22  CCC (2021), ‘Independent Assessment of UK Climate Risk’, Executive Summary, https://www.
theccc.org.uk/publication/independent-assessment-of-uk-climate-risk/
23  Met Office Hadley Centre Climate Programme, https://www.metoffice.gov.uk/weather/climate/
met-office-hadley-centre/climate-programme/index
367E02678428
978-1-5286-2938-6