 
REPUBLIC OF THE MARSHALL ISLANDS 
OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT 
MAJURO, MARSHALL ISLANDS 
 
For immediate release, 24 September 2018 
New York City, United States of America 
. 
Marshall Islands tables landmark plan to reach net zero emissions  
and to revise emissions reduction targets
 
 
The Marshall Islands today published a landmark strategy to reach net zero emissions by 2050, becoming 
only the tenth country to submit a long-term decarbonization pathway to the UN Framework Convention 
on Climate Change as called for under the Paris Agreement, and the first island nation to do so. 
 
The document – called the Tile Til Eo Climate Strategy, meaning “Lighting the Way” in Marshallese – also 
provides the basis for the country to increase the level of ambition of its existing 2025 emissions reduction 
target (or Nationally Determined Contribution) under the Paris Agreement which it plans to now do before 
2020 – also making the Marshall Islands the first nation to confirm it will unequivocally raise ambition. 
 
The Strategy is the culmination of almost two-years work by the island nation and is rooted in both an 
extensive domestic and donor consultation process. It places a new emphasis on adaptation, including 
through recommending the development of a National Adaptation Plan by 2019. It also includes economy-
wide recommendations for reducing emissions across the electricity, waste and transportation sectors; 
highlights a number of gender and social considerations; and suggests embedding the Strategy in national 
legislation alongside a regular five-year review akin to the United Kingdom’s 2008 Climate Change Act. 
 
Launching the strategy in New York City at the opening ceremony of Climate Week NYC and on the eve 
of the UN General Assembly’s Leaders’ week, the President of the Republic of the Marshall Islands, H.E. 
Dr. Hilda C. Heine, said: 
 
“Once again, my country has shown that if one of the smallest and most isolated nations can do it – 
so can everyone else, including the big emitters. Making the transition to net zero emissions makes 
sense for our global economy and for our environment, as well as for our people and our planet.” 
 
“If we are to keep temperature increases within the 1.5°C limit we agreed in Paris, every country 
must increase the ambition of their existing targets by 2020 and chart a long-term pathway to net 
zero emissions by 2050. The Virtual Summit I will convene on 22 November as part of our Presidency 
of the Climate Vulnerable Forum & the Climate Summit that the UN Secretary-General will convene 
exactly a year from now, provide the perfect platform for my fellow world leaders to do just that.” 
 
The convener of the 2050 Pathways Platform and the former French Ambassador for Climate Change, 
Laurence Tubiana, added: 
 
“The 2050 Climate Strategy of the Republic of the Marshall Islands brings the Paris Agreement to 
life with an ambitious strategy that not only charts a long-term course to low-carbon development, 
but also draws conclusions for short-term policy and investment decisions. This approach is an 
example for other countries to follow in order to set the world on a course towards carbon neutrality 
by mid-century.” 
 
The Marshall Islands’ 2050 Tile Til Eo Climate Strategy is available here: https://docdro.id/W2hK5Qj  
 
Contact Point: 
Thom Woodroofe  
Ministry of Foreign Affairs & Trade 
thom.woodroofe@highambitioncoalition.org  
  