 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The ecological and inclusive transition towards 
carbon neutrality 
 
 
Summary 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
March 2020 
1 
  
THE ECOLOGICAL AND INCLUSIVE TRANSITION 
TOWARDS CARBON NEUTRALITY 
 
The National Low-Carbon Strategy 
Implemented via the law of 17 August 2015 relating to energy transition for green growth, the 
National Low-Carbon Strategy (SNBC) serves as France’s policymaking road map in terms of 
climate change mitigation.  It is one of the two prongs of French climate policy, along with the 
National Adaptation to Climate Change Plan: 
  This second edition of the SNBC puts into action the Government’s ambition, presented in 
July 2017 via the Climate Plan and enshrined in the law (n° 2019-1147 of 8th November 
2019  relating  to  energy  and  climate),  to  accelerate  the  implementation  of  the  Paris 
Agreement  by  setting  a  target  of  achieving  carbon  neutrality  by  2050  within  French 
territories, this being understood as achieving a balance between anthropogenic emissions 
and anthropogenic absorption of greenhouse gas, i.e. that which is absorbed by the natural 
environment managed by man (forest land, grassland, agricultural soils, wetlands, etc.) and 
certain industrial procedures (carbon capture, storage and reuse). 
  On the basis of a forward-looking trajectory to 2050, it defines short- and medium-term 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction targets for France: carbon budgets. These are 
greenhouse gas emission ceilings not to be exceeded at the national level over five-year 
periods, expressed in millions of tons of CO2 equivalent1. 
  It  is  consistent  with  France’s  commitments  to  the  European  Union  under  the  Paris 
Agreement, as well as national commitments including the 40% reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions (GHG) by 2030 compared to 1990. 
  It  provides  public  policy  guidelines  for  implementing  the  transition  to  a  low  carbon 
economy, sober in energy and materials, with circularity principles applied in all activity 
sectors and lower production of waste.  
This strategy is the result of wide-ranging consultations with: 
  stakeholders  (businesses,  NGOs,  trade  unions,  consumer  representatives,  MPs,  local 
authorities, scientific experts), over the course of thirty or so meetings with the Information 
and Orientation Committee (ICO) and seven themed working groups. 
  the public, via a prior consultation in November and December 2017 under the supervision 
of a guarantor, in which an online questionnaire received more than 13,000 responses from 
citizens. Public discussion workshops ahead of the Multi Annual Energy Plan, which took 
place from March to June 2018, have also led to changes to the SNBC. 
This strategy will also take into account the opinions of the Committee of Experts on Energy 
Transition on the implementation of the SNBC in 2015 and the compliance with the first carbon 
budget. The opinions issued in 2019 by the Environmental Authority, the National  Ecological 
                                                 
1  The carbon budgets account for the emissions recorded in mainland France, Guadeloupe, French 
Guiana, Martinique, Réunion, Saint Martin and Mayotte, as well as emissions from transport between these 
geographical areas. Emissions from international air and maritime links are not included in these readings. 
2 
  
Transition Council, the High Council for Climate, the Corsican Assembly, Overseas authorities and 
the public consultation on this strategy and its strategic environmental analysis were also taken 
into account. 
 
Figure 1 - Changes in greenhouse gas emissions and sinks in the national territory between 2005 and 2050 
 
 
*Business-as-usual emissions are calculated using a so-called “With Existing Measures” scenario (AME scenario), 
which takes into account policies already implemented or enacted in 2017. 
 
Where are we now?  
Figure 2: Greenhouse gas emissions by sector in France in 2018 (Mt CO2 eq) 
 
In 2018, France's territorial emissions were 445 MtCO2eq compared to 546 MtCO2eq in 
1990  (excluding  the  land  sector);  they  therefore  fell  by  18.5%  over  this  period,  i.e.  a 
decrease of around 0.7% per year, and their per capita level is now one of the lowest among 
developed  countries  (6.4  tCO2eq/capita).  In  particular,  2018  was  marked  by  a  4.2% 
decrease in emissions compared to 2017. 
3 
  
For the sake of simplicity, this summary will subsequently refer to French emissions in 
2015, which was the last reference year when the SNBC and its scenario were drawn up and 
drafted (see below). These emissions were 458 Mt CO2eq. 
Since 2000, France has implemented climate polices to reduce its emissions through the National 
Climate Change Action Plan (2000) and successive Climate Plans. Following a national debate on 
energy transition in 2013 and the adoption of the energy transition for green growth act in 2015, an 
initial National Low-Carbon Strategy was published in 2015. This aimed to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions four-fold in France by 2050, compared to 1990 levels. It was the first road map for the 
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, and set the first carbon budgets up to 2028 to achieve its 
targets. 
However, the carbon footprint of the French, which takes into account the emissions associated 
with imported goods and services and subtracts those associated with exports, is not decreasing. 
On a per capita basis, in 2018, the French carbon footprint (11.2 t CO2eq/capita) is slightly higher 
than in 1995 (10.5 t CO2eq/capita) and has remained more or less constant since 2000. Indeed, the 
drop in emissions in France is offset by an increase in emissions associated with imports (doubled 
since 1995). 
In December 2015, the adoption of the Paris Agreement marked a turning point by establishing an 
international framework for cooperation on climate change, which: 
  sets an objective to limit global warming “to well below 2 °C, and pursuing efforts to 
limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C”, and to achieve a global balance between 
emissions and absorptions of greenhouse gas in the second half of the 21st century; 
  introduces an idea of equity to climate action: those countries that have contributed the 
most to climate change (due to their past and current greenhouse gas emissions) and which 
are in a position to do so (capacity and potential to reduce emissions) must play a more 
Where do we want to go? 
active role in global climate action2.  
The Climate Plan put forward in July 2017 renewed France's long-term ambition by setting a 
target of carbon neutrality for France by 2050, i.e. at least a six-fold reduction in greenhouse 
gas emissions compared to 1990. This goal is now enshrined in legislation. Carbon neutrality is 
an ambitious target, but its achievement is, as evidenced by the recent work carried out by the IPCC, 
essential on a global level as soon as possible in order to keep global warning down to 1.5°C.  
The baseline scenario 
The National Low-Carbon Strategy is based on a baseline scenario developed through a joint 
modelling exercise in the Multi-Annual Energy Program. This baseline scenario highlights public 
policy measures in addition to those already in place, which will allow France to adhere to 
its short, medium and long-term climate and energy objectives. 
The baseline scenario is intended to be both ambitious in its objectives and reasonable in the way it 
is achieved, without betting on technologies that would only be at the idea stage or early R&D stage 
today.  Nevertheless, the scenario makes use of a number of new technologies (carbon capture, use, 
and storage (CCUS), power-to-gas, energy storage, hydrogen...). 
                                                 
 The principles of “equity and common but differentiated responsibility, and respective 
2 
capacities in terms of the various national situations in question.” 
4 
  
What lessons can be drawn from the scenario?  
By 2050, France will reach a level of emissions that can be considered incompressible, 
particularly in the non-energy sectors (agriculture and industrial processes): around 80 Mt 
CO2eq.  Achieving carbon neutrality therefore involves compensating for these emissions with 
carbon sinks. The estimated scale of the land sector sink (forest and agricultural land) at an optimal 
and sustainable level of performance, coupled with an estimated capture and storage sink, only 
allows the offsetting of these residual non-energy emissions and the residual emissions from fossil 
fuels for one part of the transport sector (domestic air transport). 
 
Figure 3 - Sinks and greenhouse gas emissions in France in 2050 according to the baseline scenario 
 
 
To achieve carbon neutrality, it is necessary to: 
  fully decarbonise3 energy production by 2050 and rely only on the following energy 
sources: biomass resources (agricultural and wood product waste, wood energy, etc.), heat 
from the environment (geothermal energy, heat pumps, etc.) and carbon-free electricity; to 
significantly reduce energy consumption in all sectors (a reduction of more than 40% 
compared to 2015), by substantially increasing energy efficiency and developing sobriety 
(slightly lower population needs in all sectors compared to the business-as-usual scenario, 
associated with a significant change in consumption patterns, without loss of comfort); 
                                                 
3 In reality, decarbonisation will be “near-total”, as there will remain both residual leaks of renewable gas 
that cannot be reduced and the partial use of fossil fuels in air transport. 
5 
  
  reduce  non-energy-related  emissions  as  much  as  possible  (e.g.  from  agriculture 
(reduction of almost 40% between 2015 and 2050), or from industrial processes (halving 
the emissions between 2015 and 2050); 
  increase carbon sinks (natural and technological) by a factor of 2 compared to today 
to  absorb  incompressible  residual  emissions  by  2050,  while  developing  biomass 
production. In view of a certain degree of tension on biomass resources due to the current 
structure of the system, which is very much oriented towards liquid and gaseous fuels, 
biomass resources should be allocated as a priority to high value-added uses that are hardly 
replaceable by other processes (e.g. biofuels for maritime or air transport). 
 
Macro-economic assessment of the revised SNBC 
The results of the macro-economic assessment show that the SNBC allows for a slight increase in 
growth and job creation compared to a business-as-usual trajectory. It would thereby create an 
additional 300,000 to 500,000 jobs by 2030 and 700,000 to 800,000 jobs by 2050 compared to a 
business-as-usual scenario, in a context of international low-carbon transition.  
The  low-carbon  transition  has  long-term  benefits  for  household  bills,  as  energy  performance 
improvements will outweigh the rise in energy prices. Nevertheless, the energy transition requires 
significant investments (building renovations, purchase of clean vehicles, etc.). If these investments 
are profitable in the long term, the transition period requires support for households, in particular 
via investment aid targeting the most modest households and economic players. 
 
The carbon budgets 
Balance of the first carbon budget (2015-2018)  
Taking stock of the balance of the first carbon budget for 2015-2018 shows an estimated 
overrun of 65 MtCO eq over the entire period, i.e. 3.7% of the first budget4, i.e. an average 
2
surplus of around 16 MtCO eq per year. Emissions only decreased by -1.0% per year on 
2
average between 2015 and 2018, whereas the SNBC 2015 scenario projected a decrease in 
emissions of -2.2% per year on average. The overrun of the first carbon budget is partly linked to 
certain unfavourable cyclical factors, the two main ones being the low price of energy and, for the 
years  2016  and  2017,  the  unavailability  of  part  of  the  nuclear  power  generation  fleet 
(approximately +15MtCO eq over the entire period). 
2
 However, most of the overrun is attributable to more structural factors. The differences are due in 
particular  to  significantly  worse  than  expected  results  in  the  transport  and  building  sectors 
(respectively about +41 and +39 Mt CO eq over the whole period) and agriculture (about +8 Mt 
2
CO eq over the whole period).  These poor results are partly offset by  results in the power 
2
generation sector5 that are better than first SNBC targets, despite the unavailability of part of the 
nuclear fleet (about -25 Mt CO eq over the whole period).  
2
                                                 
4 The final balance of the 2015-2018 carbon budget will be published in spring 2020, based on updated 
inventory data. 
5   The cap for this sector, which includes electricity production, was set in 2015 conservatively awaiting 
arbitration on the electricity mix. 
6 
  
In addition to low energy prices, the stagnation of emissions in the transport sector can be 
explained in particular by the slight improvement in the performance of new vehicles (about 110 
gCO2/km in 2018 for cars, whereas the target was about 90 gCO2/km) and a rebound in road 
traffic (whereas a slight decrease in traffic was expected). In the building sector, the difference is 
mainly due to renovations, the pace and scale of which are still insufficient. 
The next carbon budgets 
The baseline scenario of this strategy over the periods 2019-2023 and 2024-2028 of the second 
and third carbon budgets highlights: 
  an overrun of the second carbon budget set by the first SNBC, which could be around 6% of 
the budget, closely linked to the inertia of the gaps already observed in the first budget. This 
leads us to revise the overall level of the second carbon budget in this strategy as well as its 
sectoral  distribution,  in  line  with  the  new  baseline  scenario  and  in  the  interest  of 
transparency,  without  calling  into  question  France's  ability  to  meet  its  European  and 
international commitments. 
  unequivocal adherence to the third carbon budget set out in the first SNBC, on the condition 
that all the additional measures outlined in the baseline scenario are put in place. These 
measures must be implemented fully and effectively, with regular monitoring, in 
order to return to the budget levels adopted in 2015. 
Moreover, compliance with the fourth carbon budget should make it possible to achieve the 
objective of -40% of emissions compared to 1990 set in 2015 by the law relating to energy 
transition for green growth. 
It can be noted that the rate of emission reductions foreseen by the carbon budgets of this strategy 
is more ambitious than that set by the budgets of the strategy adopted in 2015. In fact, the decrease 
expected in 2015 between the first and third budgets is nearly 20% (from 442 to 358 Mt CO2eq), 
while this decrease is nearly 30% between the 2nd and 4th carbon budgets (see table below).  This 
underlines the additional efforts expected in all sectors to meet our commitments and achieve 
carbon neutrality by 2050. 
 
Figure 4 - next three carbon budgets of the revised strategy 
4th   
  Mean annual emissions  2nd carbon  3rd carbon 
Baseline years  carbon 
(in Mt CO eq)  budget   budget  
2 budget  
  2029 -  
Period  1990  2005  2015  2019 -2023  2024 -2028 
2033 
  Total (excluding land   
546  553  458  422  359  300 
sector) 
   
Total (including land sector)  521  505  417  383  320  258 
Carbon budgets adopted in 2015 
(excluding land) – adjusted in        398  357   
2019 (for reference) 
The baseline year emissions are from the April 2018 CITEPA inventory in the SECTEN format 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
  
Figure 5 - History and trajectory of net greenhouse gas emissions in France between 1990 and 2050 
 
 
Source (data 1990 to 2017): secten CITEPA inventory - Kyoto Climate Plan format - April 2018 
 
Figure 6 – Sectoral distribution of the next three carbon budgets in MtCO eq 
2
 
 
8 
  
 
Figure 7 - Greenhouse gas distribution of the next three carbon budgets (excluding land) in MtCO eq 
2
 
 
 
9 
  
HOW CAN WE GET THERE? THE APPROACH OF THE 
NATIONAL LOW-CARBON STRATEGY 
The national low-carbon strategy formulates public policy guidelines concerning: 
  the governance of the implementation of the strategy at the national and territorial levels,  
  cross-cutting subjects such as the economy, research, education and employment, 
  each  sector  of  activity:  transport,  buildings,  agriculture,  forestry,  industry,  energy 
production, waste. 
Governance and implementation 
Ensure  the  implementation  of  the  SNBC's  guidelines  in  all  public  policies  AT  THE 
NATIONAL LEVEL... 
The transition requires the mobilisation of all actors and at all levels, which will be facilitated by the 
implementation of an integrated approach to ensure that the SNBC's guidelines and objectives 
are  taken  into  account  in  all  public  policy  decisions  (plans,  programs,  bills,  laws,  public 
procurement, etc.). 
What the SNBC says: 
  To ensure the coherence of all national public policies with the national low-carbon 
strategy, by strengthening governance, and by generalising the evaluation of the impact 
on the climate of each political decision. 
,,, AND AT THE TERRITORIAL LEVEL 
Regional planning, sustainable development and territorial equality schemes (SRADDET), regional 
climate, air and energy  schemes (SRCAE) in Ile-de-France and Corsica and regional planning 
schemes (SAR) in Overseas France, as well as territorial climate, air and energy plans (PCAET) must 
take into account the SNBC and ensure the regionalisation of its objectives and guidelines. 
What the SNBC says: 
  Establish  governance  and  regulatory  tools  in  order  to  structure solidarity  between 
territories.  
  To  ensure  linkage  between  the  different  territorial  scales,  initiate  work  to  develop 
comparable and aggregated data across all perimeters. 
Cross-sectoral guidelines 
CARBON FOOTPRINT 
Decrease emissions related to French consumption of goods and services 
Beyond national emissions, the strategy aims to reduce the carbon footprint of the French 
population (11,2 tCO2eq / capita in 2018 or 1.8 times the territorial emissions). This involves 
reducing emissions linked to the consumption of goods and services, whether these are produced 
within the national territory or imported, including emissions related to international transport. 
10 
  
Figure 8 – Carbon footprint by forms of consumption in 2018 
   
 
What the SNBC says: 
  Better  control  the  carbon  content  of  imported  products,  by  consolidating 
environmental  standards  at  the  European  and  international  levels  (carbon  pricing, 
commitments  in  trade  agreements)  and  by  supporting  competitiveness  by  effectively 
combating industry leakage at the European carbon level (implementation of a "carbon 
inclusion mechanism" tax at Europe's borders "compatible with the rules of the World 
Trade Organisation").   
  Encourage all players to better control their carbon footprint, by encouraging a more 
systematic  quantification  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  including  indirect  emissions, 
induced by public plans, programmes and projects as well as for products and services 
(strengthening the regulation of greenhouse gas balance sheets). 
 
ECONOMIC POLICY 
Reorienting financial flows for an ecological and inclusive transition 
The work carried out by the Institute for Climate Economics (I4CE) estimates that the low-carbon 
transition will require additional investments in favour of the climate in the short and medium 
term, estimated at between 15 and 18 billion €/year to reach the objectives of the 2nd carbon 
budget, and 32 to 41 billion €/year to comply with the 3rd carbon budget, i.e. a doubling of current 
investments estimated at 45.7 billion € in 20187. Some of these needs will have to be covered by 
                                                 
7  Source: I4CE’s Overview of climate finance, 2019 edition. It should be stressed that investment needs are 
estimated only for sectors with assumptions that I4CE could convert into quantified investment trajectories, 
thereby excluding agriculture, industry and nuclear power. These needs cannot therefore be compared to 
11 
  
additional new financial resources, but a significant part of future expenditure will correspond to 
investments that would have taken place anyway (construction of housing, renewal of the car fleet) 
and which need to be redirected so that they contribute to the decarbonisation of the economy. 
 
Figure 9 - Evolution of climate-friendly investments in France 
 
 
Thus, redirecting public and private financial flows so that they contribute to achieving the 
objectives of the Paris Agreement, ensuring the effectiveness of this financing and diverting 
financial flows away from climate-unfriendly investments are crucial to underpin the low-carbon 
transition.  
What the SNBC says: 
  Giving the right signals to investors, including by strengthening the price of carbon, and 
incentives to reduce HFC8 emissions as well as redirecting climate-unfriendly subsidies 
and investments towards those that contribute to achieving the objectives of the Paris 
agreement  (by  developing  labels  for  green  financial  products,  and  phasing  out 
environmentally damaging public subsidies). Encourage private and public financial actors 
to take into account climate-related risks (anticipation of the effects of climate change or 
depreciation  of  assets  as  a  result  of  climate  policies)  and  associated  opportunities 
(investments that become profitable as a result of the strengthening of climate policies). 
  Ensuring a just transition for all by taking care to preserve household purchasing power 
and  business  competitiveness  (taking  into  account  the  socio-economic  impacts  and 
sustainability  of  the  measures,  setting  up  targeted  support  measures  to  reduce 
inequalities).  
  Supporting European and international climate-friendly actions in terms of finance 
and carbon prices (support for the most vulnerable developing countries, standardisation of 
price signals between countries, support for increasing the share of financing consistent 
with the Paris Agreement in the European Union budget). 
  Encouraging investment in projects that promote low-carbon transition, by developing 
financial tools to limit investors' risk-taking (continue the work of France Transition 
Ecologique)  and  by  defining  substantial  criteria  to  determine  which  projects  are 
                                                                                                                                                             
the  total  investments  observed  over  the  2015-2018  period  of  the  1st  carbon  budget  (nearly  €42 
billion/year) but to a total of €31.6 billion/year on average for the sector perimeter under consideration. 
8 Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) are greenhouse gases with high global warming potential, and are subject to 
specific regulations that set emissions reduction targets. 
12 
  
favourable  to  low-carbon  transition  (support  the  European  Commission's  work  on 
sustainable finance).  
  Ensuring that actions that are contrary to the achievement of our climate objectives do not 
benefit from public funding, by continuing the "green budget" approach to government 
expenditure and revenue, by studying options for gradually extending this "green budget" 
approach to other stakeholders and by gradually eliminating expenditure and financial 
support identified as unfavourable to climate change mitigation. 
 
RESEARCH AND INNOVATION    
Developing  technical,  social  and  organisational  innovations  that  will  help  reduce 
France's emissions 
The transition to a low-carbon economy implies innovations in all sectors and an adaptation of 
production and consumption patterns. It makes it necessary to step up research and innovation 
initiatives in order to develop technologies and social and organisational innovations that will help 
reduce France's emissions. It is important to give France the best position in these sectors of the 
future in order to be competitive on tomorrow's markets and to offer goods and services that 
are necessary and adapted to the development of a low-carbon society. 
What the SNBC says: 
  Supporting innovative companies and facilitating the adoption and dissemination of 
innovations on a large scale, by supporting the experimentation and industrialisation 
phases,  but  also  through  communication  and  training,  taking  into  account  social 
expectations  and  obstacles,  and  setting  up  price  signals  representative  of  avoided 
emissions. 
  Developing fundamental and applied research focused on the needs of a low-carbon 
society (decarbonisation of the energy sectors, energy efficiency, carbon sinks and storage 
and  use  technologies),  in  particular  by  directing  research  towards  the  long  term,  via 
dedicated public funding, calls for projects, regular updating of technological roadmaps, 
multi-stakeholder collaborative projects, etc. 
 
TOWN PLANNING, DEVELOPMENT    
Limiting land take9 and developing resilient and carbon-efficient urban forms 
Urban planning and development have a significant direct and indirect very long-term effect on 
greenhouse gas emissions through their impact on bio-based production, carbon storage in soils, 
habitat typologies, travel patterns and vulnerability to climate change.  
What the SNBC says: 
In the short term, the land take of natural, agricultural and forest areas must be limited and its 
pace reduced by encouraging the inclusion of all new development projects in the existing 
urban  envelope,  by  promoting  functional  mix  (housing,  employment,  services,  etc.)  and  by 
adopting more moderate urban forms in terms of land use while ensuring the quality of the living 
                                                 
9 Land take: the process of changing the use of natural or agricultural land through development actions towards 
artificial land (buildings, roads, car parks, gardens, building sites, etc.). 
13 
  
environment. Set urban planning and development policies on a trajectory of zero net land take, 
taking into account the impact on territorial projects and housing and property costs. 
  To this end, strengthen urban centres and already urbanised areas by facilitating the 
resettlement of households, commerce and crafts in the centres, and optimise the use of 
space by diversifying uses, while promoting urban forms that are resilient to the effects of 
climate change. 
  Stopping urban sprawl and the degradation of agricultural, natural and forest areas 
and limiting or even halting the drying up of wetlands. Encourage the re-marketing of 
vacant  buildings  and  housing  by  bringing  them  up  to  standard  and  promote  the 
development of renewable energies in areas where their impact on the soil will be limited. 
 
CITIZENS’ EDUCATION, AWARENESS, AND ASSIMILATION OF ISSUES AND SOLUTIONS 
Involve citizens in the transition to a low-carbon culture.  
To achieve the ecological transition to carbon neutrality, it is necessary to take action in the 
emitting sectors, but also to introduce a new “low-carbon” culture, promoting new ways of 
living and consuming.  
What the SNBC says: 
  Enriching and sharing a low-carbon culture, through mobilising communication on the 
challenges of climate change and solutions, as well as awareness raising and education 
from a very young age and throughout life, through strengthening the exemplary nature 
of all public services and mobilising citizens through leadership actions or voluntary 
commitments (civic service, universal national service, etc.).   
  Supporting  citizens  in  their  transition,  by  providing  them  with  information  tools 
(environmental labelling in particular) and tools for calculating their own impact on the 
climate and by facilitating repair and reuse procedures. 
  Ensuring the acceptability by citizens of public policy measures dedicated to the low-
carbon  transition,  based  on  sociological  studies,  public  participation  in  the 
development of action plans and socio-economic impact studies. 
 
EMPLOYMENT, SKILLS, QUALIFICATIONS AND OCCUPATIONAL TRAINING    
Make  the  low-carbon  transition  an  opportunity  for  the  economy  and 
employment by supporting occupational transitions. 
The enrichment of skills, improvements in levels of qualifications, incentives to follow new career 
paths and new gateways between professions are all strategic factors that make the low-carbon 
transition an opportunity for the economy and employment. 
What the SNBC says: 
Encouraging better integration of the low-carbon challenges by industrial sectors, businesses 
and territories to facilitate occupational transitions and conversions. To this end, develop tools to 
analyse the evolution of jobs and skills linked to the transition and set up actions to support the 
sectors, particularly those most affected in their core business (building, bio-economy, mobility 
and energy production sectors). 
14 
  
  Adapting the initial and in-service training system to support the transformation of 
activities and territories (relating to both revising curricula to meet the needs of the 
professional world and updating the knowledge of teachers and trainers to enable them to 
develop their courses). 
Sectoral Guidelines 
Low-carbon TRANSPORT 
 
The transport sector is currently the largest greenhouse gas emitting sector in France (30% of 
national emissions in 2015). As all of these emissions are energy-related, the strategy aims for a 
28%  reduction  in  emissions  in  2030  compared  to  2015  and  a  complete  decarbonisation  of 
transport by 2050.10 
This assumes an average annual decrease in emissions of 3.8 Mt CO2 eq/year between 2015 and 
2050, whereas on average annual emissions increased by 0.5 Mt CO2 eq/year between 1990 and 
2015, and decreased by only 0.8 Mt CO2 eq/year over the most recent period 2005-2015. 
 
Figure 10 - Past and projected emissions in the transport sector between 1990 and 2050 (in MtCO2eq) 
 
                                                 
10   With the exception of domestic air transport and without taking into account "incompressible" residual gas 
leaks (fluorinated gases, renewable gases). 
15 
  
What the SNBC and its baseline scenario say: 
  Give the sector price signals that encourage the development of low-carbon mobility 
(standardising fuel tax rates between European countries, internalising external costs for 
road  use,  etc.)  and  strengthen  existing  market  mechanisms  (European  Emissions 
Trading Scheme - ETS, International Emissions Trading Scheme for Aviation - CORSIA), in 
order to accelerate the decarbonisation of air transport. 
  In line with the sector's energy transition, set ambitious targets in terms of the energy 
performance of vehicles, both for passenger cars (targets of 4 L/100 km in 2030 in real 
conditions for internal combustion vehicles and 12.5 kWh/100 km by 2050 for electric 
vehicles, compared with around 17.5 kWh/100 km today), heavy goods vehicles (target of 
21 L/100 km in 2040 in real conditions, i.e. a drop of almost 40% compared with 2015)11 
and sea and air transport. In addition to energy efficiency gains, set ambitious targets for 
the decarbonisation of energy consumed by vehicles, such as 
◦  By 2040, 100% of light vehicles sold will have to be zero-emissions.  
◦  For  domestic  maritime transport  that  is  100% carbon-free  in  2050,  develop  low-
carbon  in  all  French  ports  and  facilitate  conversion  to  other  low-carbon 
technologies (batteries, biofuels, hydrogen, sailing, etc.). 
◦  For air transport, replace a very large proportion of fossil fuels with biofuels (50% 
in 2050) and develop hydrogen or electric-powered aircraft. 
  Support the development of all modes of transport, in particular by providing aid for 
vehicle renewal and by adapting infrastructures (infrastructures for bio-NGV refuelling 
or electric recharging).   
  Support local authorities and businesses in setting up innovative initiatives and involve 
them  in  clean  mobility  policies  (deployment  of  low-emission  zones,  development  of 
action plans for reducing emissions and fleet renewal, etc.).   
  Spur a modal shift to modes of transport that consume the least energy and produce 
the lowest emissions, such as rail or public transport, and support active modes, such as 
cycling (with an objective of 12% of the short distance modal share by 2030, and 15% by 
2050), which can also improve health through regular physical exercise. 
  Optimize the use of vehicles in terms of volumes and weight of goods loaded so as to 
make logistics operations more fluid (increasing the current loading rate of heavy goods 
vehicles from 9.8 to 12 tonnes per vehicle in 2050). 
  Control the growth in demand for passenger transport (+26% between 2015 and 2050 
for all modes of transport combined12) and freight transport (+40% between 2015 and 
2050-2013), in particular by promoting working from home, carpooling, short routes and 
the circular economy. 
Transition in this sector must be upscaled quickly, while taking account of air quality issues - an 
area in which major co-benefits should be obtained. The transition should also make it possible to 
reduce land take by limiting construction of new infrastructures.  
                                                 
11        Energy efficiency objectives are also set for vehicles powered by natural gas and electricity. 
12   More restrained increase than with a business-as-usual scenario. 
16 
  
Low-carbon BUILDINGS 
 
The residential-tertiary sector is the most energy-consuming sector and the second largest emitter 
of greenhouse gases in France (19% of national emissions in 2015, and 28% if we add to direct 
emissions the emissions linked to the production of energy consumed in buildings). The SNBC 
defines an ambitious emission reduction trajectory for this sector13 with a target of -49% in 2030 
compared to 2015 and reaching complete decarbonisation of the energy consumed in buildings in 
2050 (only emissions linked to residual leakage of fluorinated and renewable gases will remain). 
This assumes an average annual decrease in emissions of 2.5 Mt CO2 eq/year between 2015 and 
2050, whereas emissions have remained globally stagnant between 1990 and 2015 and have 
decreased by 2.1 Mt CO2 eq/year over the most recent period 2005-2015. 
 
Figure 11- Past and projected emissions in the construction sector between 1990 and 2050 (in MtCO2eq) 
 
 
What the SNBC and its baseline scenario say: 
  Guiding the sector towards a 100% carbon-free energy use in 2050 (via price signals, 
GHG criteria in public policy instruments, etc.) and favouring the use of the solutions 
best suited to each type of building. In the short term, prioritize the elimination of fuel 
and coal heating. 
  Encourage a strong acceleration in the pace and quality of housing renovations (to 
reach 500,000 renovations per year over the current five-year period, with a minimum 
                                                 
13   The majority of emissions from construction/deconstruction are from the industry sector as defined in this 
strategy. 
17 
  
target of 370,000 high-performance complete renovations per year from 2022, 700,00014 
per year in the longer term) and tertiary buildings (in particular by setting an example 
through  the  implementation  of  high-performance  renovations  of  public  buildings)  to 
radically improve the energy efficiency of residential and tertiary buildings by 2050 
(allowing a decrease of around 40% in the sector's energy consumption in 2050 
compared to today). Prioritize energy sieves to eliminate them by 2028 and fight against 
fuel  poverty.  Develop  the  use  of  the  least  carbon-intensive  renovation  and  insulation 
products and carbon-storing materials. 
  Increase  the  energy  and  carbon  performance  levels  of  new  buildings  via  future 
environmental regulations by favouring integrated life cycle analysis approaches (taking 
into account summer comfort to limit the use of air conditioning, systematically achieving 
high-performance building insulation, using renewable energies and materials with a low 
carbon footprint, particularly those with a carbon storage capacity).  
  Aiming for better energy efficiency of equipment (for unit consumption gains, depending 
on the appliances, ranging from 15 to 60% between now and 2050) and a more moderate 
use by encouraging households to use equipment less and better and strengthening the 
dissemination  of  intelligent  demand  management  technologies,  in  particular  to  enable 
heating temperatures to be lowered by an average of 1°C by 2050. 
A sharp acceleration is required in the speed of transition in this sector, which will necessitate 
mobilisation  of  financing  to  make  the  required  investments.  Behavioural  changes  are  also 
necessary  to  reduce  energy  consumption.  For  this  sector,  training  of  professionals  and 
transformation  of  businesses  are  crucially  important.  It  is  vital  to  support  low-income 
households for insulation work in dwellings, and to change heating systems. This can be carried out 
through investment aid (energy transition tax credits, eco loans, energy saving certificates, etc). 
 
Low-carbon AGRICULTURE 
 
The agricultural sector (19% of national greenhouse gas emissions in 2015) is subject to several 
major challenges: feeding populations, ensuring the sustainability of landscapes and biodiversity, 
responding  to  growing  demands  in  terms  of  the  sanitary  quality  of  production,  coping  with 
pressure on land use and the impact of climate change. The other particularity of the sector is that it 
is a consumer of inputs whose manufacture can emit high levels of greenhouse gases (mineral 
fertilizers for example). The strategy aims to halve the agricultural sector's emissions between 
1990 and 2050, i.e. a reduction of nearly 46% between 2015 and 2050. In terms of reduction rate, 
this implies an acceleration compared to the past: -2%/year will be necessary over the 2015-2050 
period compared to -0.1%/year observed over the 2005-2015 period. Indeed, emissions from the 
agricultural sector are mostly non-energy (45% of methane mainly related to animal husbandry 
and  43%  of  nitrous  oxide  mainly  related  to  nitrogen  fertilisation  of  crops).  Although  these 
emissions can be greatly reduced by optimising agricultural practices, they cannot be completely 
eliminated:  N O  emissions  related  to  plant  growth  and  CH   emissions  related  to  ruminant 
2 4
metabolism.  Therefore, in 2050, in view of the full decarbonisation of energy emissions, agriculture 
could become the sector that emits the most greenhouse gases that are difficult to compress. At the 
same time, the strategy promotes the development of carbon storage potential in agricultural soils. 
                                                 
14   The energy renovation plan for buildings objective - April 2018 
18 
  
This assumes an average annual decrease in emissions of 1.2 Mt CO2 eq/year between 2015 and 
2050, whereas emissions decreased on average by 0.2 Mt CO2 eq/year between 1990 and 2015 
and, in particular, by 0.1 Mt CO2 eq/year in the most recent period between 2005 and 2015. 
 
Figure 12- Past and projected emissions in the agriculture sector (excluding land) between 1990 and 2050 (in 
MtCO2eq)  
 
 
What the SNBC and its baseline scenario say: 
  Reduce non-energy emissions from the agricultural sector (objectives of -17% in 2030 and -
38% in 2050 compared to today) by developing agro-ecology (including organic farming) 
and precision agriculture: 
◦  For nitrous oxide (N O) emissions, reduce nitrogen input and optimize the nitrogen 
2
cycle,  by  reducing  excess  protein  in  animal  feed  and  by  developing  plant  protein 
autonomy. 
◦  For methane (CH ) emissions, improve the management of livestock manure, optimise 
4
herd management and limit enteric fermentation. 
  Reduce the sector's energy emissions (CO ), by halving energy consumption by 2050 and 
2
by  developing  and  generalising  the  use  of  renewable  energies,  up  to  a  complete 
decarbonisation of the energy consumed by the sector in 2050. 
  Develop  carbon-free  energy  production  and  bioeconomy  to  supply  energy  and 
materials  that  emit  less  GHG  to  the  French  economy  (methanisation,  wood  energy, 
second-generation liquid biofuels, wind, solar, etc.), which will make a positive contribution 
to the sector's added value. 
19 
  
  Halt the sector's current carbon destocking: according to current inventory methodologies, 
agricultural land (crops and grasslands) released about 9 MtCO2eq into the atmosphere in 
2015.  Reverse  the  trend  through  agroforestry,  changes  in  practices  (notably 
maintaining permanent grasslands) and a decrease in land take. 
  Change  food  demand  in  line  with  the  latest  nutritional  recommendations  (less 
charcuterie and meats other than poultry and more legumes, fruit and vegetables) and 
towards local, better quality and sustainable products (including those from organic 
farming). Reduce food waste (from 14% in 2015 to 5% in 2050 for post-production 
waste). 
In the long term, the movement towards decarbonisation could bring with it a relocation of 
production activities in France. This movement is backed by a strong demand from French 
consumers for local high-quality produce. 
 
FORESTRY 
 
The forest-wood-biomass sector is a strategically important sector in achieving carbon neutrality, 
because it enables carbon sequestration and the production of bio-sourced renewable materials 
capable of replacing fossil-based products. With 31% of the metropolitan territory covered by 
forest, the forest sector represents the largest proportion of the French carbon sink (along with 
agriculture) and makes it possible to offset part of the emissions from other sectors. The strategy 
envisions  an  ambitious  development  trajectory  for  the  forest  sector  well  up  to  2050  (+87% 
compared to a business-as-usual scenario, with an increase in the wood products sink by a factor of 
8 compared to today). 
 
Figure 13 - Past and projected forest sector carbon sink (forest and wood product ecosystems) between 1990 
and 2050 (in MtCO2eq) 
 
20 
  
 
The forestry-biomass sector is a strategically important sector in achieving carbon neutrality, 
because it enables carbon sequestration and the production of bio-sourced renewable materials 
and energy capable of replacing fossil-based products. With 31% of the metropolitan territory and 
96%  of  the  territory  of  French  Guyana  covered  by  forest,  the  sector  represents  the  largest 
proportion of the French carbon sink (along with agriculture) and makes it possible to offset part of 
the emissions from other sectors. 
What the SNBC and its baseline scenario say: 
  Maintain carbon capture and stocks in the forest ecosystem through improved forestry 
management  that  allows  both  the  adaptation  of  forests  to  climate  change  and  the 
preservation of carbon stocks in the forest ecosystem, including soils (whose observation 
and statistical monitoring must be guaranteed and improved). Strengthening the carbon 
sink  in  the  forest-wood  sector  will  also  require  the  development  of  afforestation 
initiatives and a reduction in forest clearance. All of these factors would make it possible 
to slow down the declining trends in the forest sink currently observed, particularly in 
connection with increased mortality and a forest growth that is tending to decrease. 
  Maximise the effects of substitution and carbon storage in wood products, via increased 
wood harvesting (increase in wood harvesting by 12 Mm³ per year by 2026, and 
further increase thereafter, with + 0.8 Mm³ per year from 2036), while ensuring the 
preservation of biodiversity, directed towards longer-life uses (in particular broadening 
the market base of wood in construction, with the objective of tripling the production of 
wood  products  for  long-life material use  between  2015  and  2050)  and by  increasing 
recycling and energy recovery of end-of-life wood products. 
  Evaluate  the  implementation  of  the  resulting  policies,  particularly  in  terms  of 
impacts on biodiversity, and adjust them regularly in turn, to ensure that the expected 
results and co-benefits are achieved. 
These policies are combined with the French National Forests and Wood Programme (PNFB) which 
oversees forestry policy for the 2016-2026 period and sets a target for additional use of wood as 
part  of  sustainable  and  multifunctional  forest  management  (involving  challenges  in  terms  of 
protecting biodiversity, soils, water resources and landscapes). One of the characteristics of the 
sector  is  its  integration  into  a  particularly  long  time  frame:  combined  action  is  needed  for 
mitigation purposes and to adapt to climate change and to manage risks linked to natural hazards 
in forest land in order to meet the various challenges, while at the same time preserving the high 
economic value of the sector. 
 
Low-carbon INDUSTRY 
 
In 2015, the sector will account for 18% of national GHG emissions. 84% of the sector's emissions 
are subject to the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS). Industrial emissions are 
partly  due  to  the combustion  of  energy  required  for  production  and  partly  to  the industrial 
processes themselves. The strategy aims to achieve an ambitious reduction in emissions from the 
sector by 2050, with only those emissions deemed to be incompressible according to current 
knowledge and available technologies, i.e. a 35% reduction in emissions in 2030 compared to 2015, 
and an 81% reduction in 2050.  
21 
  
This implies an average annual decrease in emissions of 1.9 Mt CO2 eq/year between 2015 and 
2050, whereas these emissions decreased on average by 2.5 Mt CO2 eq/year between 1990 and 
2015, with a higher rate of decrease of 3.4 Mt CO2 eq/year over the most recent period 2005-2015. 
This decrease is partly due to the phenomenon of industrial relocation, which explains why the 
French carbon footprint has not decreased.  
 
Figure 14 - Past and projected emissions in the industrial sector between 1990 and 2050 (in MtCO2eq) 
 
 
What the SNBC and its baseline scenario say: 
  Support companies in their transition to low-carbon production systems, by developing 
decarbonisation roadmaps for the different industrial sectors and by supporting them in 
their  transition,  in  particular  through  public  and  private  financing  tools.  Support  the 
emergence of means of production of key technologies in the transition in France. This 
support should enable companies to take full advantage of the economic opportunities of 
the ecological transition, while avoiding carbon leakage. 
  Reduce and, if possible, eliminate emissions from industrial processes by starting to 
develop and adopt breakthrough technologies now (objective of a 60% reduction in non-
energy emissions from industry between now and 2050). Carbon capture, use, and storage 
(CCUS) technologies will also have a role to play in achieving carbon neutrality and could 
capture 15 MtCO2eq by 2050. 
  Strongly improve energy efficiency (+20 to +40% gains depending on the sector between 
2015 and 2050) and use carbon-free sources of energy (the objective being to completely 
decarbonise the energy consumed by this sector in 2050), namely by heavily electrifying the 
industrial sector (aiming to make 70% of the sector's consumption in 2050 electric), a very 
efficient use of biomass and renewable energies and the recovery of waste heat (with the 
objective being to recover 10 TWh of heat from annual discharges at over 100°C by 2030). 
22 
  
  Control demand for materials by developing the circular economy in order to eco-design 
products,  limit  the  resource  waste  from  the  production  phase,  optimize  the  rate  of 
incorporation of recycled materials in products (to aim for incorporation rates of at least 
80%  for  steel,  aluminium,  plastic,  glass  and  paper  in  2050),  their  recyclability  and 
reparability rates. 
  A transition to industry as close as possible to zero carbon by 2050 will require a profound 
transformation of the sector. For this reason, the most efficient measures must be envisaged 
today, and it is important to avoid being locked in to using ineffective technologies leading 
to failed investments. 
CARBON-FREE energy production 
 
In  2015,  energy  production  generated  around  10%  of  national  greenhouse  gas  emissions, 
particularly due to the fact that winter peaks lead to the use of carbon means of production. The 
strategy aims for a 33% reduction in the sector's emissions by 2030 compared to 2015 and an 
almost complete decarbonisation of energy production by 2050 (the residual part being made up of 
fossil fuels for air and sea transport, and residual leakage, in particular methane leakage). 74% of 
the sector's GHG emissions are subject to the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS) 
(2017 figure).  
This assumes an average annual decrease in emissions of 1.3 Mt CO2 eq/year between 2015 and 
2050. Emissions decreased by an average of 1.3 Mt CO2 eq/year between 1990 and 2015, with a 
higher rate of decrease of 2.7 Mt CO2 eq/year over the most recent period 2005-2015. 
 
Figure 15 - Past and projected emissions in the energy production sector between 1990 and 2050 (in 
MtCO2eq) 
 
23 
  
 
What the SNBC and its baseline scenario say: 
  Control demand and round off the electricity demand curve by mitigating the seasonal and 
daily peaks in consumption. This can be achieved via:  
◦  energy  efficiency,  through  implementation  of  effective  technologies  that  must  be 
supported by public policies providing incentives to optimise resources. A decisive role 
will be played by research and development in energy efficiency and storage. 
◦  By  promoting  moderate  uses  and  behaviour  relating  to  energy  consumption. 
Deployment of intelligent devices and awareness-raising concerning best practices will 
make it possible to introduce and facilitate this careful attitude. 
  Decarbonising  and  diversifying  the  energy  mix  (see  the  projected  mix  in  2050 
below). To achieve this, continue actions to develop renewable and recovery energies 
(carbon free heat, biomass and carbon-free electricity). Identify the potential and needs in 
terms of heating and cooling networks by territory. Strongly develop the mobilisation of 
biomass, in order to reach a production 2.5 times higher than today, while considering all 
the underlying issues (biodiversity, resources, economic and environmental conditions) and 
by favouring local uses. 
 
Figure 16 - Sources of energy which could meet the final energy needs in 2050 
 
  Specify the options, in particular in terms of mobilising and allocating biomass resources, 
to better inform the structural choices for balancing energy supply and demand in 
the long term, in particular the future of gas and heating networks. 
The changes to the energy mix and the energy efficiency objectives are determined within the 
framework of the Multi Annual Energy Plan (PPE). The PPE is based on the same reference scenario 
as the SNBC and is compatible with its guidelines. 
 
 
24 
  
WASTE processing for a circular economy 
 
The waste sector currently accounts for 3% of national greenhouse gas emissions. The strategy 
aims to reduce the sector's emissions by 37% in 2030 compared to 2015 and by 66% by 2050 (i.e. 
to eliminate all emissions that can be eliminated according to current knowledge). 
This assumes an average annual decrease in emissions of 0.3 Mt CO2 eq/year between 2015 and 
2050, whereas emissions stagnated on average between 1990 and 2015. However, a positive trend 
in the decrease in emissions has been observed since the early 2000s: -0.4 Mt CO2 eq/year on 
average between 2005 and 2015. 
 
Figure 16 - Past and projected emissions in the waste sector between 1990 and 2050 (in MtCO2eq) 
 
 
What the SNBC and its baseline scenario say: 
  Reduce the amount of waste (including food waste) to reduce per capita waste generation 
by 20% by 2050: 
◦  by preventing the generation of waste from the design phase at the producers, in 
particular through eco-design (limiting packaging, product life and reparability...) and 
the Extended Producer Responsibility channels; 
◦  by promoting the circular economy, product reuse and repair with consumers; 
  Improve collection (more sorting at source, better waste characterisation, generalisation 
of organic waste collection) and waste management by developing material recovery 
(reuse,  recycling  or  organic  recovery)  then  energy  recovery  (cogeneration,  co-
incineration, energy recovery from sorting rejects, waste water heat recovery) to reduce 
waste sent to landfill by 90% by 2035. Limit greenhouse gas leaks from waste storage 
facilities (biogas capture and recovery) and wastewater collection and treatment facilities. 
25 
  
For this sector, the strategy is essentially the 2018 circular economy roadmap strategy, which aims 
to  improve  production  (eco-design,  incorporation  of  recycled  materials),  consumption  habits 
(development  of  reuse  and  repair  facilities,  extension  of  products’  life  cycle),  and  waste 
management  (optimisation  of  waste  sorting,  development  of  recycling  and  recovery),  and  to 
mobilise  all  relevant  stakeholders.  The  anti-waste  law  for  a  circular  economy,  published  in 
February 2020, sets out this roadmap and endorses it with additional measures based on four 
guidelines: putting an end to the various forms of waste in order to preserve natural resources, 
strengthening consumer information so that consumers can make informed choices, mobilising 
economic players to transform production and distribution methods, improving waste collection 
and sorting, and fighting against illegal dumping. 
   
26 
  
MONITORING, ASSESSMENT AND REVISION OF THE 
STRATEGY 
 
Regular monitoring of the Strategy using a set of indicators 
Monitoring of the national low-carbon strategy is based on a set of indicators, consisting of: 
  performance indicators directly comparable to national targets and illustrating the results 
of the strategy as a whole. 
  contextual indicators to help put the results into perspective. 
  indicators relating to the implementation of each cross-cutting and sectoral guideline (pilot 
indicators).   
  indicators of the level of integration of the strategy’s guidelines into public policies. 
  additional  environmental  indicators  provided  as  part  of  the  strategic  environmental 
assessment. 
The results indicators are updated every year following publication of the greenhouse gas emission 
inventories. This annual monitoring makes it possible to progressively assess compliance with the 
carbon budget for the current period. 
A holistic monitoring of all the indicators is carried out at least every two years as of the adoption of 
the strategy and its future revisions. 
All of the stakeholders will be included in the SNBC monitoring process. 
A regular review process 
Every five years, the National low-carbon strategy (SNBC) undergoes a complete revision cycle. It 
includes, starting with the next revision cycle, the adoption of a five-year law setting energy and 
climate objectives and priorities for action after parliamentary debate, the revision of the strategy's 
baseline scenario and the definition of a new carbon budget, the revision of the strategy and its 
guidelines  (stages  in  which  stakeholders  are  also  strongly  involved)  and  the  performance  of 
regulatory consultations. The revision of the strategy notably allows for the adaptation of the 
baseline  scenario  to  changes,  particularly  in  knowledge  (technical,  economic,  social  and 
geopolitical). 
This revision is based on a retrospective assessment of the implementation of the national low-
carbon strategy. It examines compliance with the indicative annual periods of the current carbon 
budget,  compliance  with  the  trajectories  of  the  strategy’s  baseline  scenario,  and  the  level  of 
integration of the guidelines into public policies. This assessment makes it possible to identify any 
deviations from the trajectory and the target objectives, and to analyse their causes, providing 
valuable feedback in order to draw up a realistic revision of the Strategy.   
27 
  
Strengthened governance 
The Haut Conseil pour le Climat (HCC - High Council for Climate) has its own dedicated resources. It 
will participate in regular monitoring and assessment of the strategy, in particular regarding 
implementation of operational actions resulting from the strategy, and adherence to the trajectory 
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. 
28 
  
Strategic Environmental Assessment of the SNBC 
The strategic environmental assessment of the SNBC highlights notable probable positive effects on 
the following environmental challenges: 
  Limiting of greenhouse gas emissions (the primary objective of the strategy) via the 
guidelines defined for all of the emitting sectors or sectors with storage potential; 
  Strengthening of territories’ resilience in the face of climate change and limiting of 
natural risks, through the guidelines concerning land use planning and the construction 
sector; 
  Limiting  of  resource  depletion  and  development  of  the  circular  economy,  via  the 
guidelines concerning waste prevention and management, recovery of local resources and 
promotion of bio-sourced materials. 
  Preserving soil and water quality and improved spatial management, via the guidelines 
in the agriculture and forestry sectors, aiming to reduce pollution in soils and to increase 
their carbon storage. The strategy also proposes guidelines aiming specifically to limit land 
take. Nevertheless, the development of low-carbon processes and technologies, and the 
installation of new infrastructures, must be carefully examined in order to avoid any impacts 
in  terms  of  soil  and  water  pollution.  The  Multi  Annual  Energy  plan  (PPE)  contains 
environmental recommendations on this topic. 
The strategic environmental assessment also raises some other points of interest, in particular 
concerning: 
  The preservation of biodiversity and the loss of natural, agricultural and forest spaces. 
Increased use of biomass may have indirect impacts due to the intensification and extension 
of agricultural and forestry production systems. The environmental recommendations of the 
National Biomass Mobilisation Strategy aim specifically to limit this type of impact; 
  Management  of  non-energy  mineral  resources  associated  with  development  of 
renewable energy sources, electrification of transport systems (production of batteries, 
photovoltaic  panels,  grids,  etc.),  and  renovation  of  energy  systems  in  buildings.  These 
challenges are taken into account in a more operational manner in the Multi Annual Energy 
Plans (PPE) and the Resources Plan for France; 
  Air quality, which could potentially be affected by the use of biomass and its combustion, 
and by the energy renovation operations in buildings (maintenance of indoor air quality by 
means of ventilation systems). This challenge is included in the guidelines of the SNBC, and 
taken into account on an operational level in the National Plan for Reduction of Atmospheric 
Pollutants, and in the Plan for Energy Renovation of Housing. Probable positive impacts of 
the SNBC should also be noted regarding the quality of outdoor air, notably associated with 
the  guidelines  concerning  energy  decarbonisation  and  widespread  electrification  of 
transport. 
 
29 
 