Climate Action Plan 2050 
Principles and goals of the German  
government's climate policyImprint
Published by
Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety (BMUB)
Public Relations Division  ·  11055 Berlin  ·  Germany
Email: service@bmub.bund.de  ·  Website: www.bmub.bund.de/english
Edited by
BMUB, Division KI I 1
Design
design.idee, Büro für Gestaltung, Erfurt
Printed by
Druck- und Verlagshaus Zarbock GmbH & Co. KG 
Picture credits
See page 91.
Date
November 2016
First Print
1,500 copies
Where to order this publication
Publikationsversand der Bundesregierung
Postfach 48 10 09  ·  18132 Rostock  ·  Germany
Tel.: +49 30 / 18 272 272 1  ·  Fax: +49 30 / 18 10 272 272 1
Email: publikationen@bundesregierung.de
Website: www.bmub.bund.de/en/service/publications
Notice
This publication is part of the public relations work of the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, Building and
Nuclear Safety. It is distributed free of charge and is not intended for sale. Printed on recycled paper.Climate Action 
Plan      2 0 5 0
Principles and goals of the German 
government's climate policy4 KLIMASCHUTZPLAN 2050CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050  5
Contents
A  Summary Climate Action Plan 2050   6
B  Climate A  ction Plan 2050 – Cabinet resolution  10
1   Introduction     12
2   Climate action as a strategy to modernise our economy   16
3   International context (global and EU)   20
3.1   Multilateral framework   21
3.2   EU climate targets for 2050 and 2030   23
3.3   The Climate Action Plan 2050 in the context of European climate policies   24
4   The path toward greenhouse gas neutrality in Germany   26
4.1   Transformation of the economy and society by 2050   26
4.2   Target setting and description of the pathway up to 2050   28
4.3   Promoting climate action at all levels – Climate action as a societal project   30
5   Targets and measures   32
5.1   Climate action in the energy sector   34
5.2   Climate action in the buildings sector   42
5.3   Climate action and mobility   49
5.4   Climate action in industry and business   56
5.5   Climate action in agriculture   62
5.6   Climate action in land use and forestry   66
5.7   Overarching goals and measures   72
6   Implementing and updating the Climate Action Plan   78
 
C  Annex to the Climate Action Plan 2050   80 
Abbreviations   80
Glossary  83
Picture credits  916 KLIMASCHUTZPLAN 2050
Summary of the Climate 
A 
Action Plan 2050
Principles and goals of   Key elements are: 
the German government's 
→  Long-term target: based on the guiding principle 
climate policy  of extensive greenhouse gas neutrality in Germany 
by the middle of the century
- Executive Summary - 
→  Guiding principles und transformative pathways 
as a basis for all areas of action by 2050
Origins of the Climate Action Plan
→  Milestones and targets as a framework for all sec-
In their coalition agreement of 2013, the CDU, CSU  tors up to 2030
and SPD agreed that “in the light of the European 
targets and the outcomes of the 2015 Climate Change  →  Strategic measures for every area of action
Conference in Paris, in Germany we want to define an 
emissions reduction pathway with a final target of 80  →  Establishment of a learning process which enables 
to 95 percent lower greenhouse gas emissions com- the progressive raising of ambition envisaged in 
pared to 1990 by 2050. We will augment this target  the Paris Agreement
with concrete measures, drawn up through a broad 
dialogue (Climate Action Plan).” Anchoring in international climate action  
From June 2015 to March 2016, the Länder, munici- The agreement adopted at the international climate 
palities, associations and citizens compiled joint pro- summit in Paris in December 2015, which entered 
posals for strategic climate measures to be effective  into force on 4 November 2016, is the first climate 
by 2030. In March 2016 they presented the resulting  agreement which places obligations on all countries. 
catalogue containing 97 proposals for measures to the  Under the Paris Agreement, the international com-
Federal Environment Minister.  munity made a binding commitment to the goal of 
keeping global warming well below 2 degrees Celsius 
In drafting the Climate Action Plan 2050, the German  above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to 
government considered this catalogue alongside the  limit the temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius. 
findings of scientific reports and scenarios in the light 
of the Paris Agreement. The German Cabinet adopted  The agreement gives all parties the clear task of con-
the Climate Action Plan 2050 in November 2016.  sistently implementing the necessary climate meas-
ures. For the European Union (EU) and Germany this 
What the Climate Action Plan 2050  means resubmitting or updating their Nationally  
represents Determined Contributions (NDC) by 2020 and, as of 
2025 for the post-2030 period, making their NDCs 
The Climate Action Plan provides guidance to all  progressively more ambitious.  
areas of action in the process to achieve our domes-
tic climate targets in line with the Paris Agreement.  The EU climate and energy policy directly affects 
These areas of action are energy, buildings, transport,  Germany's climate policy. Greenhouse gas emissions 
trade and industry, agriculture and forestry. in the EU are dealt with equally by the European CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / SUMMARY 7
Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) and the EU Effort  The Climate Action Plan introduces a paradigm shift. 
Sharing Decision (ESD).  In future, renewable energies and energy efficiency 
will be the standard for investments. In this way, the 
The German government recognises effective emis- Climate Action Plan 2050 creates the necessary condi-
sions trading as a key climate action instrument of  tions to keep Germany's economy competitive in a 
the EU for the energy sector and (some areas of) in- decarbonising world.
dustry. Therefore, at EU level, Germany will advocate 
strengthening the ETS.   Guiding principles for 2050 and 
milestones for 2030
The goal: extensive greenhouse gas 
neutrality by 2050 Based on the climate targets for 2050 the Climate 
Action Plan formulates guiding principles, mile-
In 2010, the German government decided to reduce  stones and measures for all areas of action.  Like the 
greenhouse gas emissions by 80 to 95 percent by 2050  Climate Action Programme 2020, the Climate Action 
compared to 1990 levels. The German government  Plan 2050 defines the areas of action on the basis of 
reaffirms this long-term target and in pursuing it will  the source principle generally used in international 
make an appropriate contribution to implementing  greenhouse gas reporting. Under this principle emis-
the commitment made in Paris, also with a view to  sions arising, for instance, through the use of electric 
the goal set out in the Paris Agreement of achieving  household appliances are attributed to the energy sec-
global greenhouse gas neutrality in the second half of  tor as the “source” of the electricity and hence of the 
the century.  emissions. The Climate Action Plan 2050 addresses the 
areas of action energy, buildings, transport, industry, 
As a leading industrialised nation and the EU member  agriculture, land use and forestry. It also sets out over-
state with the strongest economy, we have already  arching targets and measures.
geared our Climate Action Plan to the guiding prin-
ciple of extensive greenhouse gas neutrality by the  The guiding principle presents a 2050 vision for each 
middle of the century. Germany's per capita green- area of action, while milestones and measures focus 
house gas emissions are higher than the EU average,  on 2030. An evaluation of available climate scenarios 
and considerably higher than the global average. It  and analyses of the transformation needed in the dif-
must also be borne in mind that the sum of the NDCs  ferent areas of action helped inform these guiding 
that are the backbone of the Paris Agreement is not  principles and milestones. Under the interim target 
yet enough to keep global warming below 2 degrees.  for 2030, Germany's total greenhouse gas emissions 
Therefore, the onus is on all parties to go beyond their  need to be reduced by at least 55 percent compared to 
current targets. 1990 by 2030 at the latest (reference value: 1,248 mil-
lion tonnes total emissions of CO [Carbon dioxide] 
2
Strategy for modernising the national  equivalent). In the Climate Action Plan 2050 the Ger-
economy man government has agreed for the first time on sec-
toral targets which set the framework up to 2030 for 
In the framework of the agreed targets, the German  the proportional reduction of greenhouse gases in the 
government is taking a technology neutral and in- areas of action considered. A comprehensive impact 
novation friendly approach. The government firmly  assessment will be carried out for these, the results of 
believes that open competition to produce the best  which will be discussed with the social partners, thus 
ideas and technologies will advance Germany further  allowing adjustments to the sectoral targets in 2018. 
along the path towards greenhouse gas neutrality. The 
Climate Action Plan 2050 is a strategy for modernising 
our economy and provides guidance for all areas of 
action up to 2050 and for upcoming investments, es-
pecially for the period up to 2030. By specifying clear 
framework conditions, the strategy will help avoid 
stranded investments and structural breaks.8 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / SUMMARY
Table 1:   Emissions from areas of action set out in definition of the target:
1990 2014 2030 2030 
(in million tonnes of  (in million tonnes of  (in million tonnes of  (reduction in %
Area of action CO equivalent) CO equivalent) CO equivalent)  compared to 1990)
2 2 2
Energy sector 466 358 175 – 183 62 – 61 %
Buildings 209 119 70 – 72 67 – 66 %
Transport 163 160 95 – 98 42 – 40 %
Industry 283 181 140 – 143 51 – 49 %
Agriculture 88 72 58 – 61 34 – 31 %
Subtotal 1,209 890 538 – 557 56 – 54 %
Other 39 12 5 87 %
Total 1,248 902 543 – 562 56 – 55 %
Source: Climate Action Plan 2050 of the Federal Government
Selected strategic measures regions affected by the structural change and the 
financing of these investments.
Below is a description of some of the strategic meas-
ures contained in the Climate Action Plan 2050: →  The Climate Action Plan contains a road map to-
wards an almost climate-neutral building stock. A 
→  The German government will set up a commis- key component here is the gradual further develop-
sion for growth, structural change and regional  ment of energy standards for new buildings and 
development. This commission will be based at the  existing stock undergoing extensive refurbishment. 
Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy  Another important aspect is to focus funding on 
and will work together with other government  heating systems based on renewable energy sources. 
ministries as well as with the Länder, municipal-
ities, trade unions and representatives of affected  →  A climate strategy for road transport will outline 
businesses, branches of industry and regional  how greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced by 
stakeholders. Realistic prospects for the necessary  2030, taking into consideration the correspond-
transformation process need to be established for  ing proposals made at EU level. The strategy will 
affected businesses and regions. Strategies derived  address emissions from cars, light and heavy 
from this and concrete steps for implementation  commercial vehicles and issues related to GHG-
need to be agreed on and the prerequisites for  (Greenhouse gas-) free energy supply, the requis-
financing established. To enable the commission  ite infrastructure and the interlinking of sectors 
to begin its work at the start of 2018 and present  (through electric mobility).
results preferably by the end of 2018, preparatory 
work should commence in the current legislative  →  Working together with industry, the German gov-
period. To support the structural change, the com- ernment will launch a research and development 
mission is to develop a mix of instruments target- programme aimed at reducing greenhouse gas 
ing economic development, structural change,  emissions from industrial processes and guided by 
social compatibility and climate action. This will  the target of greenhouse gas neutrality. The option 
include the investments required in sectors and  of industrial CO recycling (carbon capture and 
2CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / SUMMARY 9
utilisation, CCU) will be taken into account in this  transformative paths chosen and the measures they 
context.  entail will be continuously reviewed for consistency 
with target achievement. If necessary, measures will 
→  Together with the Länder, the German govern- be adapted to keep up with technical, societal, polit-
ment will advocate the complete implementation  ical, social and economic developments and changes 
and stringent execution of provisions laid down  and with the latest scientific findings. 
for fertilisers, in particular the Fertilisers Ordin-
ance and the planned statutory ordinance on  Programmes of measures
good professional practice regarding the handling 
of nutrients in agricultural processes. This is to  The plan will be fleshed out with programmes of 
ensure that the target value of 70 kilogram of ni- measures which will be drawn up in collaboration 
trogen per hectare, set out in the German National  with the German Bundestag. The first programme 
Sustainable Development Strategy, will be reached  will be adopted in 2018 and quantified in terms of 
between 2028 and 2032. its greenhouse gas emission reduction effects. The 
programmes of measures will be designed in partici-
→  Focus in land use and forestry is on the preserva- pation with the existing Climate Action Alliance. The 
tion and improvement of carbon sequestration  work will include assessing and politically evaluating 
through carbon sinks in forests. To achieve this, ef- economic, social and ecological impacts of suggested 
forts will be geared towards expanding Germany's  measures.  
forests. In addition, the German government will 
advocate that in the Joint Task for the Improve- The status of implementation of the respective pro-
ment of Agricultural Structures and Coastal Pro- grammes of measures will be presented in the annual 
tection, the funding area “forests” should place  climate action report, first submitted in 2015, thus 
greater emphasis on combating climate change. allowing swift policy adjustments to be made if neces-
sary. 
→  Finally, a review will be carried out on ways to 
gradually further develop Germany's tax system  The German version of the German Climate Action 
with a view to achieving the climate targets for  Plan 2050 can be downloaded from:    
2050. The German government will strengthen  www.bmub.bund.de/N53483/
economic incentives which encourage polluters 
  to reduce their environmental pollution and 
move towards more sustainable production and 
consumption patterns. In order to do so, climate-
damaging incentives of various taxes will also be 
reviewed. 
A learning process
The Climate Action Plan 2050 outlines a gradual 
transformation in technology, industry, society and 
culture. This transformation will be achieved through 
a learning process involving the scientific community 
and accompanied by a public dialogue process. 
The Climate Action Plan 2050 will be regularly up-
dated in accordance with the Paris Agreement. In line 
with the mechanism set out in the Paris Agreement 
for progressively raising the ambition of national cli-
mate policies, the interim targets and milestones, the 10 KLIMASCHUTZPLAN 2050
Climate Action Plan 2050 –   
B 
Cabinet resolution
The coalition agreement for the 18th le-
gislative period includes a stipulation to 
produce a Climate Action Plan 2050, which 
would make Germany’s existing climate 
targets for 2050 – and the interim targets 
agreed – more specific and align them with 
the outcomes of the 2015 Climate Change 
Conference in Paris. The Plan would also 
detail measures to achieve those targets. 
The Climate Action Plan 2050 outlines the basic prin- gas (GHG) emissions by 80 to 95 percent compared 
ciples for implementing Germany’s long-term climate  with 1990 levels by 2050. It has reaffirmed this long-
action strategy, thus providing essential guidance for  term target and in pursuing it will make an appropri-
all actors in the economy, society and the scientific  ate contribution to implementing the commitment 
and academic community. Designed to be a process  made in Paris, also with a view to the goal set out in 
capable of incorporating new insights and develop- the Paris Agreement of achieving global greenhouse 
ments, its basic philosophy centres on regular reviews,  gas neutrality in the second half of the century. 
continuous learning and constant improvement. In 
this sense, it cannot and does not seek to be a detailed  At the G7 (Group of Seven) summit in Elmau in June 
master plan for decades to come. 2015 we, in conjunction with the other leading indus-
trialised nations, pledged to make our contribution to 
The Paris Conference set the global climate change  decarbonising the global economy over the course of 
efforts on a completely new and ambitious footing:  this century. One of the ways of achieving that would 
all 196 Parties to the UN Framework Convention on  be by developing and using innovative technologies. 
Climate Change agreed on a common goal and ap- In May 2016, the G7 countries also underpinned their 
proach to combatting climate change. We intend to  leading role by committing to early, transparent and 
keep global warming well below 2 degrees Celsius  robust implementation of their Nationally Deter-
above pre-industrial levels and are aiming to limit the  mined Contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agree-
temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius. ment and by promoting increased ambition over time. 
Germany has already achieved a great deal within this 
Back in 2010 – well before the Paris Conference – the  process, by supporting renewable energy technologies 
German government decided to reduce greenhouse  for example. This has made it possible for quantum CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 11
technological leaps to be taken that have also made  The Climate Action Plan 2050 is both the basis and a 
a positive contribution to international climate ac- guideline for identifying and fleshing out climate ac-
tion. Germany will continue in the future to meet its  tion strategies and measures in the different areas of 
special responsibility as an industrialised country in  action. How exactly they are to be fleshed out should 
the field of climate action. Because of our particular  be explored with the active participation of the busi-
responsibility as the strongest economy in the EU,  ness sector and civil society actors. There is no doubt 
one of the goals we are already aiming for with this  that the government will assess and politically evalu-
Climate Action Plan is to be largely greenhouse gas  ate the economic, social and environmental impact of 
neutral by mid-century. It is important to bear in  any specific measures. This will ensure that the Ger-
mind here that the sum of the NDCs (national climate  man business sector maintains its ability to compete 
change pledges) that are the backbone of the Paris  internationally. It will also create planning certainty 
Agreement is not enough to keep global warming  for enterprises, private households and consumers 
below 2 degrees. It is therefore crucial that all parties  and ensure that it is possible to respond flexibly to 
surpass their current pledges. technological innovations, for example. 
Germany has achieved a great deal in terms of climate  In the Climate Action Plan 2050, the German govern-
action and in progressing its Energiewende without  ment has agreed on sectoral targets which describe 
compromising industry’s competitiveness. Notwith- the pathway up to 2030 for the proportional reduc-
standing the structural adjustments and “learning  tion of greenhouse gases. Since the sectoral targets 
costs” associated with these processes of change, it has  may in some cases have a far-reaching impact on our 
also created new economic opportunities and innov- economic and social development, they will undergo 
ations. The German government intends to continue  a comprehensive impact assessment, the findings of 
on its chosen path, which will include consistently  which will be discussed with all social partners and 
implementing the objectives that are part of the Ener- which will enable us to modify the sectoral targets in 
giewende. While doing this, it will focus attention on  2018.
making sure German industry remains competitive 
and has well-functioning, innovative and closed-loop  The Climate Action Plan 2050 will be modified at 
value chains.  regular intervals to ensure it takes societal, political, 
social, economic and environmental developments 
The Climate Action Plan 2050 does not contain any  and changes into account. It will therefore be regu-
rigid targets; the goals it sets are characterised by  larly updated, in keeping with the Paris Agreement 
a technology-neutral and innovation-friendly ap- and reflecting the learning process. The aim is to 
proach. It provides guidance for upcoming invest- regularly check the effectiveness of the measures and 
ments, especially for the period up to 2030. The Bun- modify them wherever necessary. This will be carried 
destag will put specific legislative measures in place.  out transparently and through a process of dialogue 
A successful climate policy must be systematically  with all stakeholders.
geared to creating future opportunities, define a clear 
framework, promote research and innovation, and 
help businesses to invest in future-proof sustainable 
technologies and therefore avoid stranded invest-
ments. We are seeking to instigate the changes needed 
without structural breaks. We need to make use of 
the strength and creativity of Germany’s market 
economy, combined with the forces of competition, 
to ensure we achieve the existing national, European 
and international climate targets. German industry’s 
strength in innovation and research has huge poten-
tial to develop new technologies. The existing climate 
targets need open competition to elicit the best ideas 
and technologies and we intend to support that. 1 
Introduction
Tackling climate change calls for a long-term approach.  function and adapt, which in turn would jeopardise 
The German government’s climate policy is guided by  both biodiversity and the livelihoods of millions of 
the Paris Agreement, which was adopted in December  people. This would seriously compromise the basis 
by the Parties to the United Nations Framework Con- underpinning our economic activity, food security  
vention on Climate Change. The Agreement, which  and social cohesion worldwide. Agenda 2030 and its  
was ratified by Germany and the European Union on  17 global Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which 
5 October 2016 and entered into force on 4 November  were adopted in September 2015, are also important for 
2016, also serves as a benchmark for the government’s  climate action. 
climate policy. It includes the legally binding target, 
agreed upon by the international community, to keep  Unless we take rapid and ambitious action, there is a 
global warming well below 2 degrees Celsius above pre- danger of the global temperature rising by four degrees 
industrial levels and endeavour to limit the tempera- or more. This would cause a severe decline in the pos-
ture increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial  sibilities for people, societies and ecosystems to adapt to 
levels. The aim is that this should prevent the worst  the level of climate change that we are already experi-
impacts of climate change and stop the possibilities for  encing. The impacts of climate change and the associ-
adaptation from disappearing. This aim is based on the  ated increase in extreme weather events such as droughts 
fact that, as the IPCC (International Panel on Climate  and heavy rainfall would cause flooding in many re-
Change) has repeatedly stressed, even at a temperature  gions of the world but also water scarcity and therefore 
two degrees higher than preindustrial levels, local and  crop failures, aggravate the situation of people at risk of 
global ecosystems will be threatened in their ability to  poverty and hunger and severely jeopardise the global CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 13
supply of food and clean water. It would no longer be  To do that, the Plan must be an integral part of a sus-
possible to meet the Sustainable Development Goals  tainability strategy that covers all three dimensions of 
which the international community is striving to  sustainability (environmental, economic and social) 
achieve. This could lead to more intense conflicts and  and also take into account Agenda 2030’s Sustainable 
trigger refugee movements. A development of this kind  Development Goals. Germany will only be able to de-
would also counteract global development cooperation  velop the collective strength needed to successfully 
efforts and result in considerable associated costs. This  shape the change with innovation and investment on 
is illustrated in the reports by the IPCC and the World  the scale needed if there is a consensus in society.
Bank. Thus, climate action is crucial to successful eco-
nomic, development, foreign and security policies. The climate targets will be on a par with economic 
and social development goals. By setting a longer-term 
Comprehensive societal and economic changes are  framework, we will create planning and investment 
necessary if the climate target set out in the Paris  certainty. We will set out socially and economically re-
Agreement is to be achieved. The Paris Agreement stip- sponsible pathways to ensure we meet our national and 
ulated that a balance between anthropogenic emissions  European climate targets while maintaining our level 
by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases  of prosperity. To stimulate the technological develop-
should be achieved in the second half of the century,  ments needed, we intend to increase German industry’s 
which is tantamount to global greenhouse gas neutral- innovative strength and its investment activity. The 
ity or net zero emissions. targets the EU has set for 2020 – 20 percent reduction 
in greenhouse gases, 20 percent increase in energy effi-
That means that we must achieve a complete shift to  ciency and raising industrial production’s share of in-
an economy that does not produce greenhouse gas  vestments to 20 percent – have to go hand in hand. Part 
emissions over the course of the century. This will only  of our modernisation strategy will be about basing our 
be possible if all the world’s economies step up their  infrastructure on renewable resources, energy and ma-
endeavours to tackle climate change. In particular – as  terials, which will stimulate innovation and investment 
the IPCC’s scenarios show – the world’s energy sys- on a scale that will far outstrip the European target that 
tems must be almost completely decarbonised by the  20 percent of investment should be in industrial pro-
middle of the century at the latest, such as converted  duction in the long term.
in a way that means they no longer emit the principal 
greenhouse gas CO; otherwise it will not be possible to  The German government’s Climate Action Plan 2050 
2
achieve the goal of greenhouse gas neutrality. There is  also looks at the social impact of the planned transition 
international consensus that the industrialised coun- towards making Germany greenhouse gas neutral. The 
tries should lead the way in reducing GHG emissions.  government believes that transparent monitoring of 
This goal requires fast and decisive action to make sure  implementation of the Nationally Determined Contri-
the right course is set in time and to avoid the signifi- butions (NDCs) towards meeting the targets of COP 21 
cant additional costs that a delayed transition would  in Germany and Europe, but also in countries and 
incur. Climate-related damage already increased four- regions that are of key importance for German com-
fold to 100 billion US dollars a year between 1992 and  petitiveness, is just as important as carefully analysing 
2014. In the light of this, Germany instigated the G7  economic and social effects. The government’s climate 
Climate Risk Insurance Initiative at the G7 summit in  policy also attaches great importance to international 
Elmau in June 2015.  cooperation in reducing greenhouse gases and to fur-
ther developing global emissions trading. 
The German government sees the content of its Cli-
mate Action Plan 2050 as a way of providing guidance  With the German government’s Climate Action Plan 
for the process to achieve national climate targets in  2050, we are at the beginning of a process of setting a 
compliance with the Paris Agreement – in the field of  framework and outlining a transformation pathway 
energy provision, the buildings and transport sector, in  involving all the sectors affected, their businesses, the 
industry and business and in agriculture and forestry. trade unions their workforces belong to, associations 14 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
and civil society. We will refine this process in a way  to remaining internationally competitive. Strategic cli-
that is scientifically sound, has democratic legitim- mate action, which focuses on innovation and modern-
ation and includes broad and continual participation  isation – thus actively shaping the changes that are hap-
of the scientific and academic community. We will also  pening anyway – has a decisive influence on quality of life 
continually review the existing mix of instruments and  and drives prosperity and employment. The earlier this 
modify it where necessary. The technologically neutral  transformation is tackled and the more cost-effective it is, 
approach taken by the Climate Action Plan is of great  the lower the social burden and economic risks will be. It 
significance. New technologies – ranging from energy  is therefore indisputable that instigating structural change 
storage or innovative industrial processes through to  early on will strengthen Germany’s competitive position 
carbon capture and utilisation (CCU) can help us to  in a world economy that is aiming for greenhouse gas 
meet our climate targets in a cost-effective and eco- neutrality before the end of the century.
nomically acceptable way in the long term. The govern-
ment therefore intends to work with the business sec- The Climate Action Plan 2050 is able to build on a 
tor to advance the fields of technology that are import- climate policy that is already well developed and uses 
ant to achieving a greenhouse gas-neutral economy. a broad mix of instruments. In particular, it can build 
on the experience and success of Germany’s Energie-
It is becoming increasingly essential to think about dif- wende and on the comprehensive measures that began 
ferent sectors and the interaction between them in an  to be put in place back in December 2014 as a result of 
integrated way – an approach that is known as “sector  the Climate Action Programme 2020. 
coupling.” At the same time, focusing on climate targets 
clearly helps to identify scope for action and proposals  Building on the experience of Germany’s climate policy 
for action, which should be realised in conjunction  to date, the Climate Action Plan 2050 heralds a para-
with the global Sustainable Development Goals and  digm shift: a far-sighted climate policy can make a de-
other goals – such as those set out in the National   cisive contribution to preventing stranded investments. 
Policy Strategy on Bioeconomy – in order to fully   Thus far, technologies based on renewable energy and 
harness any synergy effects.  energy efficiency, which are of particular significance in 
combating climate change, were introduced into exist-
The Climate Action Plan 2050 is not a rigid instru- ing fossil – and to some extent nuclear – energy mar-
ment; it points to the direction needed to achieve a  kets, sometimes with conditions attached, sometimes 
greenhouse gas-neutral economy. In line with the Paris  with direct or indirect subsidies. Now the logic has to 
Agreement, it will be modified at regular intervals in  be reversed: renewables and energy efficiency will in 
response to technical, societal, political, social and eco- future be the standard for investment. And the follow-
nomic developments and changes, and new scientific  ing principle must be applied: first of all, energy de-
findings. This regular updating of the Climate Action  mand must be significantly and permanently reduced 
Plan 2050 is part of a learning process that makes it  in all sectors (“efficiency first”); secondly, renewable 
possible to comprehensively check the effectiveness of  energy must be directly used in all sectors whenever 
the measures adopted and review the transformation  it is feasible and makes economic sense to do so: and 
pathways selected and modify them if necessary – also  thirdly, electricity from renewable sources must be 
bearing in mind the mechanism to regularly raise the  used efficiently for heat provision, the transport sector 
level of ambition in national climate policies as stipu- and industry (sector coupling). With the new electri-
lated in the Paris Agreement.  city market design, the digitisation of the Energie-
wende and the reform of the Renewable Energy 
With its Climate Action Plan 2050, the German govern- Sources Act, which enters into force on 1 January 2017, 
ment is underlining the fact that it takes seriously the  we have created the electricity generation framework 
necessity to bring about a long-term transformation  needed to achieve this. Research and innovation play 
of climate-relevant structures and processes in Europe  an important role in ensuring new technologies are 
and internationally. By incorporating that conviction  developed to achieve greenhouse gas neutrality. It is 
into its domestic policies it is also playing an active part  important that any goals set are based on a technologi-
in shaping European and international processes.  cally neutral approach so that research funding is in 
line with market requirements and conducive to  
Two factors are key here: structural change and modern- innovation, which in turn will ensure there is latitude 
isation are integral parts of economic activity and essential  for new disruptive innovations. CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 15
predetermining public budgets. The measures set out 
in the Climate Action Plan 2050 will be funded from 
the individual budgets when the relevant federal 
budget is drawn up. It is also crucial that electricity 
and other forms of energy remain affordable to avoid 
compromising economic development and social 
participation. With this in mind, we have a particular 
responsibility when implementing the Energiewende 
to create a regulatory framework for our energy and 
climate policy which guarantees affordability and a 
fair distribution of costs. 
The content of the Climate Action Plan 2050 is based 
on the goal of becoming largely greenhouse gas neu-
tral by 2050. It involves all the relevant sectors – re-
flecting the intention of Agenda 2030 – thus making it 
possible to identify early on conflicting goals, critical 
interactions and path dependencies, as well as poten-
tial opportunities and risks.
Even a full and ambitious implementation of the 
Paris Agreement will not prevent the level of climate 
change which is already inevitable. It is therefore es-
sential to make use of synergies with the existing 
German Strategy for Adaptation to Climate Change 
wherever possible. That also applies to other areas of 
action of a transformative environmental policy such 
as conservation of natural resources and increased 
The Climate Action Plan 2050 implements this   replacement of fossil resources with sustainably pro-
modernisation strategy on three levels:  duced biogenic ones.
1.  It develops specific guiding principles for the in- The success of climate action depends crucially on the 
dividual areas of action for 2050, creates space for  acceptance of necessary measures and on broad-scale 
innovation and strives to maximise sustainability. public participation. The Federal Ministry for the En-
vironment, Nature Conservation, Building and Nu-
2.  It outlines robust transformation pathways for all  clear Safety (BMUB) therefore set up a comprehensive 
areas of action, examines critical path dependencies  ex ante dialogue and participation process in order 
and describes interdependencies. to give representatives of the Länder (federal states) 
and local authorities, business and industry and civil 
3.  It underpins goals, in particular the interim   society associations, and the general public the oppor-
GHG target for 2030, with specific milestones and  tunity to play an active role in developing the Climate 
strategic measures, and includes impact and cost  Action Plan 2050 and make suggestions for specific 
analyses. measures. We will continue the dialogue with the af-
fected sectors and their businesses, the trade unions 
It links climate action – as an integral part of a  their workforces belongs to, associations and civil 
national sustainability policy – with other envir- society on the basis of the  Climate Action Plan 2050 as 
onmental, economic and social goals without  it now stands.Climate action as a strategy  
2 
to modernise our economyCLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 17
Our climate action strategy is designed to provide sub- are seeking to achieve the transition by 2050, which 
stantial guidance for the process needed to achieve the  means we still have three and a half decades to make 
climate targets. It is a strategy that aims to modernise  further adjustments to our course. Investments in fos-
our economy, and one of its main features is that it  sil structures with a service life beyond 2050 are at risk 
neither focuses on nor rules out any particular tech- of becoming what are known as stranded assets for the 
nology. It is a strategy that is designed to promote and  companies concerned, with the associated risk of job 
develop new technologies, in the field of renewable  losses for their employees. 
energy, for example, and to increase energy efficiency. 
This is a way of conserving resources and using them  A far-sighted modernisation policy that seeks to avoid 
more efficiently and at the same time improving the  lock-in effects and subsequent destruction of capital 
performance and competitiveness of our economy and  and job losses must ensure the right steps are taken 
its businesses.  now. It would make sense for investors to take their cue 
from the fact that national, European and international 
Climate action is thus tantamount to increased eco- efforts to combat climate change are also increasingly 
nomic performance and competitiveness. Decarbonisa- focusing on energy efficiency and renewable energy. 
tion means restructuring industry; it does not mean  Investments in fossil structures will become the excep-
deindustrialisation. On the contrary: only if highly in- tion and should only be made in cases where there are 
dustrialised countries such as Germany provide living  still no technological alternatives or those available are 
proof that meeting national climate targets does not  disproportionately expensive. 
have a negative impact on a country’s economic and 
industrial success will other countries follow our lead.  So what do efficiency and renewable energy sources as 
the new investment standard mean for the different 
To make sure this transition towards a largely green- sectors? Let us begin with electricity generation, which 
house gas-neutral society in the next decades becomes  currently accounts for by far the greatest share in terms 
a success story, not only for climate policy but also  of greenhouse gas emissions. Electricity generation 
for economic policy, we need to take a broader view.  plays a key role because, once they have increased their 
National, European and international climate targets  energy efficiency and direct use of renewables, other 
are at the centre of the climate action strategy. This  sectors will only be able to decarbonise if they increase 
strategy must also take economic and social concerns  their use of electricity. In the future, we will most prob-
into account: economic concerns because ultimately  ably drive electric cars and also use electricity to meet 
only economic success will make climate action an  our highly efficient buildings’ small remaining heat 
attractive proposition worldwide, and social concerns  demand. That is first and foremost a piece of good news 
because one of the principles of climate action on a  for producers of electricity: the electricity market is 
national as well as international level is that “strong  growing despite efficiency measures. It is growing both 
shoulders must carry more than weaker ones.” Climate  in terms of volume but also qualitatively as a result of 
action will only enjoy the broad social acceptance it  the Digital Revolution, which is stimulating the instal-
needs in Germany if economic success and social bal- lation of smart applications and networks in houses 
ance are achieved. This will make the modernisation of  and factories. That is opening up new fields of business 
our economy a beacon of success. Here again, guidance  and also new employment prospects in the electricity 
can be found in Agenda 2030: its 17 goals reflect all  industry. 
three dimensions of sustainability equally.
All of this only makes sense if the electricity is gener-
But, first and foremost, the regulatory framework must  ated from renewable sources. Continued investment in 
be reliable in the medium and long term. The main  these technologies is vital. On the way to an economy 
concern here is to avoid stranded investments. We  that is entirely based on renewable energy, we will still 18 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
need gas-fired power stations because they are highly  what point in time we should completely stop invest-
efficient, have relatively low CO emissions and are  ing in fossil fuel heating systems. It is important here to 
2
controllable, which makes them essential for our sup- take consumer interests and their economic situ-
ply security. Over the coming decades, we must replace  ation into account, be they owners of existing proper-
natural gas with CO-neutral gas from renewable  ties or tenants. It is essential to prevent any further 
2
sources. We must avoid any new investment in fossil  price hikes, which are already making housing increas-
energy infrastructure and the resulting lock-in effects  ingly unaffordable for people with average incomes, 
(in line with Article 2.1(c) of the Paris Agreement). especially in urban areas. The German government is 
therefore dedicating considerable expenditure to pre-
Of all investments that are relevant for greenhouse gas  venting such price hikes. 
emissions, buildings have the longest service life – ap-
proximately 100 years – and their integrated buildings  The other relevant issue in the buildings sector, along-
services are also often in use for over 20 years. We  side the necessity of an efficient electricity and heat 
should therefore define an efficiency standard for all  supply, is the question of construction materials and 
new buildings which, in conjunction with direct use of  whether they are based on fossil or renewable raw ma-
renewable energy and electricity, would produce zero  terials. Even at the design stage for constructing new 
CO emissions. We already have cost-efficient technol- buildings or modernising existing buildings, basing 
2
ogies, so that this new standard could be introduced  the choice of construction materials on the primary 
without delay.  and secondary raw materials they contain and includ-
ing a life cycle analysis of buildings and materials in 
The challenges presented by the stock of existing build- decision-making has a decisive impact on their effects 
ings are incomparably greater. It consists largely of only  and potential for reducing CO emissions.
2
moderately well insulated buildings that are heated for 
the most part by gas and oil-fired boilers. Converting  Alongside the buildings sector, the sector most likely to 
these systems to run on efficient condensing boilers  pose the greatest challenge is transport. Although rail 
could vastly reduce CO emissions. However, we need a  transport is to a great extent already electrified, pas-
2
timetable for the existing building stock, showing from  senger and freight transport by road, air and waterways CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 19
is almost entirely dependent on fossil fuels. Electric  Germany to other countries that have a less stringent 
mobility offers the opportunity to achieve the Ener- climate policy. We will do this by granting exemptions 
giewende in private motor traffic. But, in the long term,  from further reduction targets in areas where the best 
we need to switch to alternative CO-neutral fuels in  global standards are already being met. This also has 
2
aviation and maritime shipping too. To achieve this  the effect of ensuring we work towards ambitious 
we have to create the right incentives to stimulate the  climate action on an international level and put coord-
development of new technologies. If we want to meet  inated policies and measures in place, and also system-
the climate targets set for 2050, we need a road map for  atically gear industrial production to highly efficient 
industry and climate policy, which the government and  technologies to an even greater extent.
industry can use to devise an ambitious investment 
strategy for the transport sector. To be cost-efficient and work towards the goal of a high 
degree of decarbonisation by mid-century, the Ener-
The proposal for taking a broader perspective put for- giewende needs to be aligned with investment cycles. 
ward here, under which the Energiewende becomes  Investment in efficiency and renewable energy has to 
a strategy for modernising our economy, is not ap- become the norm and investment in fossil structures a 
plicable to all fields. Emissions caused by industrial or  temporary exception with clearly defined target time 
methane emissions in agriculture cannot be prevented  frames for transitioning. With this far-sighted mod-
by energy efficiency and switching to renewable energy  ernisation policy, we will prevent stranded investments 
sources. These emissions will continue unless we suc- and lock-in effects. In this way, Germany can embark 
ceed in developing technological alternatives or finding  on a sustainable growth and investment pathway.
other solutions. This is the point of departure for the 
bioeconomy. As a consequence of the Paris Agreement, a rivalry 
among countries is developing over who can come up 
In this modernisation strategy we also take a number  with the most intelligent and cost-efficient modern-
of different competitive conditions into account in  isation policy. Germany’s Energiewende has given it a 
climate action. We will reduce carbon leakage, such as  head start over the competition. We will have to work 
the displacement of greenhouse gas emissions from  hard to maintain that lead. International context 
3 
(global and EU)CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050K /L CIMABAISNCEHTU RTEZSPOLLAUNT 2I0O5N0 21
3.1  Multilateral framework The Agreement gives all parties the clear task of con-
sistently implementing the necessary climate meas-
The agreement adopted at the international climate  ures. Like Agenda 2030, it breaks down the previous 
summit in Paris in December 2015, which entered  rigid division into industrialised countries on the one 
into force on 4 November 2016, is a watershed for   hand and developing countries and emerging econ-
international climate action. It is the first climate  omies on the other, while still emphasising the leader-
agreement which places obligations on all countries.  ship role of the industrialised countries.
So far 195 countries have submitted their Nationally 
Determined Contributions (NDCs) to the United Na- To regularly verify whether the countries’ NDCs are 
tions. With the entry into force of the Paris Agreement  adequate, the Agreement contains a five-year review 
and ratification by individual countries, the inter- and ambition mechanism. It also applies to the Euro-
national community has made a binding commit- pean Union (EU), which will mean resubmitting or 
ment to the goal of keeping global warming well  updating NDCs by 2020 and, as of 2025, making NDCs 
below 2 degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels  in the post-2030 period progressively more ambitious. 
and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase  A uniform, robust transparency system for report-
to 1.5 degrees Celsius. This goal exceeds the previous  ing emissions, progress in implementing NDCs, and 
one, agreed to as a guiding principle, of maximum  climate financing are also intended to ensure that the 
global warming of 2 degrees Celsius – recognising that  goal of greenhouse gas neutrality can be achieved.
this would considerably reduce the risks and effects of 
climate change. The Paris Agreement also enshrines  The Agreement offers particular support for vulner-
for the first time the goal, now binding under inter- able countries in the areas of climate action and 
national law, of strengthening resilience and reducing  adapting to climate change – in the form of financing, 
vulnerability to climate change and making finance  technology transfer and capacity building. 
flows consistent with a pathway towards low green-
house gas emissions and climate-resistant develop- The Paris Agreement sends an important signal to 
ment, which is also the intention of Agenda 2030. society and the global economy, and therefore to all 
private- and public-sector stakeholders. It also reflects 
Countries all over the world have also set themselves  important demands by Germany and the EU and re-
the goal of achieving greenhouse gas neutrality in the  quires the German government to work nationally 
second half of the century, which means that only as  and at the EU level to ensure that it is implemented.
much greenhouse gas will be emitted as can be bal-
anced with an equivalent amount of removals. This  The Paris Agreement means that all countries must 
means, according to the scenarios of the IPCC, that  take action and are committed to doing so. A great 
decarbonisation of energy systems all over the world  deal has already happened worldwide: for example, 
will be necessary by midcentury. However, more is  in 2014 carbon dioxide emissions did not exceed the 
involved, because the stated goal includes all green- previous year’s level for the first time. Increasing 
house gas emissions, even if some, such as those from  numbers of stakeholders in Germany’s Länder, local 
agriculture, cannot be reduced to zero.  authorities and the private sector are recognising the 
opportunities offered by the transformation away 
Fast, deliberate action will be required if global warm- from fossil fuels and towards renewables and energy 
ing is to be kept well below 2 degrees Celsius above  efficiency. 
pre-industrial levels. The agreed efforts to limit the 
temperature increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius include  Germany is making a comprehensive contribution 
taking the intended steps, such as decarbonisation  to financing climate-neutral development all over 
of the global energy supply, faster than previously  the world as part of its national climate policy and its 
planned.  cooperation in the areas of climate and development 22 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
(bilaterally and through the multilateral development 
banks). Mobilising private climate finance is also a 
central issue for the German government. Add-
itional steps will be needed to implement the Paris 
Agreement’s core aim of making all financial flows 
consistent with a pathway toward low-emission, 
climate-resilient development, including appropri-
ately taking climate policy objectives into account 
in all investment decisions by the public and private 
sectors and in corresponding development plans. This 
is an important issue for the German government. 
Against that background, the government created a 
global partnership for the implementation of national 
climate action plans in 2016. The aim is to maintain 
or increase momentum in this area in developing 
countries and emerging economies and to ensure that 
international cooperation on National climate action 
plans  is effective and partner-oriented.
Other aspects of the Paris Agreement have profoundly 
influenced Germany’s commitment to international 
climate policies and its work on economic, develop-
ment and security policies. This relates particularly to 
the implementation of reduction targets, adaptation to 
climate change, and the importance of technological 
development and the transfer of technology for climate 
change mitigation and adaptation. Germany will ac-
cordingly work to expand the Technology Mechanism 
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Cli-
mate Change (UNFCCC). Germany will also contribute  of the German government. The aim of the initiative 
intensively to redefining the mechanisms of the carbon  is to increase access to insurance cover against the 
market. impacts of climate change for up to 400 million of the 
most vulnerable people in developing countries and 
The German government appreciates the importance  emerging economies by 2020. The USD 420 million in 
of forests for climate action and associated measures  support promised by the G7 in Paris will make it pos-
for maintaining and improving sinks and reservoirs  sible to insure 180 million more people against risks 
for greenhouse gases (see Section 5.6). It emphasises  related to climate change, thereby reducing incentives 
the key role played by protecting, maintaining and  to migrate. 
restoring terrestrial ecosystems and by the sustainable 
management of forests in combating climate change  Two other key steps toward more equitable and en-
and therefore stresses the importance of additional  vironmentally compatible global development in 
actions and the involvement of the private sector and  2015 sent out an important message, which may have 
civil society in this area. It recognises the importance  played a role in the success of the UN Climate Change 
of cooperative approaches, including those designed  Conference in Paris. The first was adoption of the 
to avoid climate risks and devise insurance schemes  Addis Ababa Action Agenda to support the financ-
to provide cover against those climate risks that can- ing of development and provide a global framework 
not be avoided. It also supports the development of  for sustainable development, and the other was the 
approaches for dealing with the displacement caused  resolution on the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Devel-
by climate change. Against that background, a G7  opment in New York, in which the UN agreed on Sus-
initiative for insurance against climate risk (“Insu- tainable Development Goals (SDGs) that clearly show 
Resilience”) has been established at the instigation  the interdependence between different fields of action CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 23
3.2  EU climate targets for  
and goals. The goals contained in SDG 13, which relate 
to action to combat climate change, are also reflected  2050 and 2030
in the Paris Agreement and create a comprehensive 
multilateral framework for taking all aspects of cli- The EU has undertaken to reduce its greenhouse gas 
mate change mitigation and adaptation into account.  emissions by 80 to 95 percent compared with 1990 by 
SDGs 14 and 15, on conserving oceans and protecting  2050. That decision is compatible with the reductions 
terrestrial ecosystems, are also of vital importance for  that, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on 
tackling climate change. Effective climate action will  Climate Change (IPCC), the group of industrialised 
not be possible unless the essential climate-regulating  countries must make if the global temperature in-
functions of marine and terrestrial ecosystems are  crease is to be limited to two degrees Celsius above 
maintained and enhanced. pre-industrial levels. This target must be reviewed 
in the light of the long-term global targets specified 
Another important signal that impacted on multi- in the Paris Agreement. Like the world’s other major 
lateral negotiations was the 2014 decision by the EU  economic regions, Europe must also raise its ambi-
Member States to progressively reduce emissions of  tions.
fluorinated greenhouse gases in Europe by around 80 
percent to about 35 million tonnes of CO equivalent  Germany acknowledges its responsibility for making 
2
by 2030. Germany is also working to bring about cor- an appropriate, fair contribution to reaching the  
responding multilateral action in the context of the  European climate target. Economically strong Mem-
Montreal Protocol. ber States should make contributions in accordance 
with their abilities, within the range of the EU cli-
Germany actively pursued a legally binding multilat- mate target. Where Germany is concerned, it must be 
eral agreement at all levels in the run-up to the UN  remembered that, because the reference year is 1990, 
Climate Change Conference in Paris. The Sixth Peters- the decrease in greenhouse gas emissions in eastern 
berg Climate Dialogue and the German presidency of  Germany following reunification can be included in 
the G7 offered particularly good opportunities to pro- the calculation. 
mote Germany’s vision of an ambitious, universally-
valid climate agreement and to take specific initiatives  The long-term climate target is intended as both a 
to create confidence in the areas of renewable energy  driver and a benchmark for target-setting by the EU 
and climate risk insurance. International climate fi- over the medium term. The European heads of state 
nancing was a key factor before and during the Paris  and government agreed on the targets for 2030 in 
conference. German Chancellor Merkel announced at  October 2014. The European Council agreed to a re-
the 2015 Petersberg Climate Dialogue that Germany  duction in greenhouse gas emissions within the EU of 
aims to double international climate finance by 2020  at least 40 percent by 2030 compared with 1990. The 
based on the 2014 level. Germany is endeavouring to  binding target for increasing the use of renewables 
get the international financial institutions (including  was set at a minimum of 27 percent of final energy 
the World Bank), to make a considerable increase in  consumption. The target for improving energy ef-
their contributions to international climate finance  ficiency is also at least 27 percent (compared with the 
while ensuring projects use incentives to promote posi- business-as-usual scenario). The German government 
tive effects on climate action and development. At their  supports raising the EU energy efficiency target for 
summit in Elmau in 2015, the G7 countries agreed on  2030 to 30 percent.
the objective of decarbonising the world economy dur-
ing this century, thereby making a commitment to the  The EU climate target for 2030 was forwarded to the 
joint vision of a worldwide target to reduce greenhouse  Secretariat of the UN Framework Convention on 
gas emissions to between 40 and 70 percent below 2010  Climate Change as an NDC for the EU and its Mem-
levels by 2050 in accordance with the upper end of the  ber States in March 2015. The climate target is delib-
most recent IPCC recommendations. This sends a clear  erately stated as a minimum, leaving open the option 
signal to investors and stakeholders all over the world  to increase it. 
that there will be a paradigm shift in investments in the 
direction of consistent transformation of the affected  The German government believes that the medium-
sectors, particularly energy systems.  term target must be scientifically reviewed in light 24 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
of the long-term targets in the Paris Agreement. The  German industry, with its innovative technologies 
implications for European climate policy of the deci- and system solutions – in mechanical and plant engin-
sions made in Paris, which are enshrined in inter- eering, in the electronics industry as the forerunner 
national law, must be thoroughly examined. Based on  of an efficiency revolution in the global economy, or 
scientific analyses, the EU will take a position before  in smart control technology and the storage technol-
2020 as to whether its contribution for 2030 must be  ogy that makes it possible to use decentralised energy 
revised. In any event, the previous specification of “at  supply systems based on renewables – is contributing 
least 40 percent” must be fulfilled.  all over the world to achieving the long-term green-
house gas neutrality agreed on in Paris. 
3.3   The Climate Action Plan  The German government is committed to effective 
emissions trading as an important EU instrument for 
2050 in the context of 
climate action for the energy sector and some parts 
European climate policies of industry. It advocates strengthening emissions 
trading. Emissions trading is an instrument available 
EU climate and energy policies directly affect na- throughout the EU; it is not structurally designed to 
tional climate policies. Greenhouse gas emissions in  achieve targeted emissions reductions in individual 
the EU are covered about equally by the European  countries and sectors and thus ensure national cli-
Emissions Trading System (ETS) and the EU Effort  mate targets are met. Nonetheless, this instrument 
Sharing Decision (ESD). There are several additional  does offer a way to use the price of CO to create 
2
climate instruments, such as the CO and Cars Regu- centralised price incentives to reduce CO emissions, 
2 2
lation or the Ecodesign Directive for energy-related  thereby supporting the achievement of national 
products. Effective protection against carbon leakage  climate targets. For that reason, it is very important 
– also in order to safeguard investment in energy- to intensify the pricing signals sent by emissions 
intensive industries in Germany – must continue to  trading. If fewer price incentives come through the 
be provided after Paris. ETS, it will be increasingly necessary to use national CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 25
measures to make “readjustments” so that national  The land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) 
targets can be reached. The German government will  sector is being included in the EU Climate Frame-
work at the European level to make the ETS more  work for the first time. From the viewpoint of the 
effective.  German government, it is particularly important 
to establish incentives for climate action measures 
The EU Climate and Energy Framework 2030 for  in the LULUCF sector and not to call into question 
reaching the reduction target of at least 40 percent  the climate targets and level of ambition in the 2030 
must be consistently implemented in the light of  Framework in other sectors. It will be necessary to 
the Paris conclusions. To that end, emissions trading  keep the particular role of this sector in achieving 
must be further strengthened in the context of the  greenhouse gas neutrality firmly in mind.
ongoing reform at the European level and during the 
review process in accordance with the Paris Agree- In addition to emissions trading and the Effort Shar-
ment. One important step in that regard was the  ing Decision, EU targets for renewable energies and 
introduction of the Market Stability Reserve (MSR),  energy efficiency for 2030 are also of vital importance 
and it must be followed by other steps to create a  for climate action in Europe. Those targets must 
pricing signal based on scarcity. It will also be neces- thus be achieved without fail. Further expansion of 
sary to ensure that the sectors in which reductions  renewable energies in Europe must be supported by 
are covered by the Effort Sharing Decision – primarily  a robust legal foundation and pursued by the Energy 
transport, buildings and agriculture – are also ambi- Union that the EU plans to set up. The German gov-
tious in implementing the target for 2030. Sectors  ernment will advocate raising the energy efficiency 
outside of emissions trading must also contribute to  target from 27 to 30 percent. 
decarbonising the economy and make progress in 
modernisation. The path toward 
4
greenhouse gas neutrality 
  
in Germany
4.1   Transformation of the  advantage of new capabilities – including technical 
capabilities – will make it possible for us to create a 
economy and society  
liveable future. A strategy of this kind is wiser than 
by 2050 responding to the need for climate action later with 
expensive repair work and the associated destruction 
The economy and society are subject to constant and  of capital – which would have high added economic 
accelerating change. No-one knows what Germany  and social costs. 
will look like in 2050. A great deal remains to be seen. 
Patching up long-standing structures is not a promis- The objective of bringing about a transformation 
ing strategy for preparing for change and achieving  into an economy and society that are largely green-
the goal of making Germany greenhouse gas neu- house gas neutral by mid-century is a major chal-
tral. Proactively planning and deliberately taking  lenge, but it is within reach. Time is of the essence CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 27
– and the climate system with its inherent inertia  – to generate greenhouse gas-neutral electricity, live 
will not tolerate further delays. Moreover, decisions  comfortably, ensure mobility, and provide modern 
and investments being made in many areas of the  services to homes and businesses. Effective climate 
economic infrastructure today will pave the way for  action simultaneously reduces emissions that pol-
development up to 2030, 2050 or even beyond. This  lute the air, thereby reducing the number of illnesses 
applies in particular to the energy supply, industrial  and early deaths and damage to ecosystems, along 
production, mobility and development in rural and  with the associated losses to individuals and national 
urban areas and therefore to the basis of a sustain- economies.
ably high standard of living. That makes it even more 
important to keep the goal firmly in mind today and  The guiding principle behind Germany’s transition to 
take systematic action now – as part of a learning pro- greenhouse gas neutrality is a comprehensive mod-
cess – to shape the technical and economic, as well as  ernisation strategy that sees change as an opportunity 
societal and cultural, transformation that is necessary  and actively shapes it. In that regard, investments 
to achieve this.  will be made in greenhouse gas-neutral technol-
ogies, production processes and infrastructure to take 
As a matter of principle, the German government will  advantage of opportunities to promote prosperity, 
do its utmost to ensure the best possible coordination  innovation, employment and environmental protec-
of all individual measures contained in draft national,  tion. Current research and development activities are 
European and international legislation on climate,  already making important contributions to this. 
renewable energy or other areas that will influence 
the energy complex. To achieve broad public support, the measures of the 
Climate Action Plan 2050 must include social justice, 
In that regard, an evaluation of numerous studies and  affordability and economic efficiency, participation 
scenarios shows that the German climate target is  and a vibrant democracy as fundamental criteria. This 
technically and economically achievable, in most cases  will also succeed thanks to active participation. We 
based on known technologies. At the same time, other  are counting on the enormous innovative ability of an 
technologies will have to be developed, which is why  open society and will promote this through targeted 
research and development are particularly important. support for diverse initiatives and stakeholders. This 
transformation will therefore become an important 
Germany has already achieved a great deal with its  societal and political project in coming decades.
Energiewende. German greenhouse gas emissions are 
estimated to have fallen by 27.2 percent to about 908  The Climate Action Plan 2050 is addressing this.
million tonnes of CO equivalent between 1990 and 
2
2015. Five times as much electricity is being generated  It will be necessary to take advantage of the challenge 
from renewable energy sources as it was 16 years ago,  of climate change by developing a comprehensive 
a trend that was not predicted back then. Germany  investment and modernisation programme for the 
can now construct buildings that consume only half  German economy. Security of supply and affordable, 
as much energy as buildings did 20 years ago. And  competitive energy prices are accorded the same pri-
technologies for renewable energies and energy   ority as national targets for reducing emissions.
efficiency are being developed all over the world 
much faster than predicted in most scenarios.  We are no longer alone in taking this approach. Many 
countries have chosen the path of a climate-com-
New technologies and digitisation are in some cases  patible economy. Increasing numbers of countries 
making it possible today – across conventional sectors  all over the world are recognising the need to take 28 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
4.2   Target setting and 
action. And it is becoming increasingly clear that the 
description of the  
competitiveness of a national economy in this century 
will decisively depend on its ability to decarbonise in  pathway up to 2050
a timely fashion without the fear of emissions, invest-
ment and jobs shifting to other countries. Develop- The German government’s climate target is based on the 
ment that takes place as early as possible, is politically  EU’s goal of reducing greenhouse gases by 80 to 95 per-
well managed and avoids structural breaks can offer  cent by 2050. This will not fundamentally change. How-
advantages on the world market to an innovative na- ever, it is clear that, given the Paris Agreement and its 
tional economy like Germany’s. The global market for  goal of reducing global greenhouse gas emissions to net 
environmental and efficiency technologies is already  zero during the second half of the century, today’s in-
2.5 trillion euros, and current estimates indicate that  dustrialised countries – including the EU and Germany – 
this will at least double by 2025. The German econ- will have to achieve the goal of greenhouse gas neu-
omy can secure a promising starting position for itself  trality early. The German climate policy is therefore 
in international competition in this area. Germany  oriented to the guiding principle of becoming largely 
can rely on the strengths of an economic model that  greenhouse gas neutral by 2050. 
is strongly dependent on a competitively organised 
market, on research and development, on innovation  The German government is orienting its first Climate 
and on a broad and diversified basis for value cre- Action Plan in the medium term to the target of reduc-
ation. Consistently and efficiently orienting policies to  ing greenhouse gas emissions in Germany by at least 
technological, social and economic innovation will be  55 percent compared with 1990 no later than 2030. 
decisive for successfully transforming Germany into a  According to the First  Progress Report on the Ener-
country that is greenhouse gas neutral. giewende  (2014) and the Fourth Monitoring Report on 
the Energiewende (2015), greenhouse gas emissions are 
One essential element in that transformation is to  to be reduced by at least 70 percent no later than 2040. 
intelligently structure the enabling environment, for 
example by ensuring that legislation takes the in- The Paris Agreement also states that all signatories will 
vestment cycles of businesses and the economy into  regularly review how they can increase their NDCs. The 
account, internalising external costs, creating appro- targets enshrined in the Agreement are therefore to be 
priate economic incentive structures, establishing the  reviewed and raised if necessary when developing  
necessary legal basis and offering opportunities for  additional national climate action plans.
dialogue and participation. This will also mean scruti-
nising and progressively improving the mix of instru- The interim goal of reducing greenhouse gas emis-
ments used in previous climate and energy policies as  sions by at least 55 percent no later than 2030 is backed 
required by the transition. The German government  by milestones in the individual areas of action in the 
continues to rely on the precautionary principle and  Climate Action Plan. This provides guidance for reduc-
simultaneously on continued development of the  ing emissions and further structuring strategies for the 
knowledge base by providing strategic funding for re- individual areas of action and also improves the coher-
search and innovation. This is particularly the case in  ence of contributions by the various sectors to the  
areas such as industrial process emissions where it is  necessary overall reduction. 
still difficult to discern where the potential for reduc-
tion can be found and ultimately also harnessed.  An evaluation of the available scenarios and studies 
shows that the long-term potential for reductions is 
The IPCC has repeatedly pointed to the need for am- much greater for energy-related emissions than for 
bitious climate action. The international community  non-energy emissions (which come primarily from 
recognised this in Paris and approved the correspond- agriculture). 
ing measures. Now it is a matter of all Parties keeping 
their word. It is not possible or necessary at present  To achieve the long-term overall climate target for 
– including for Germany – to specify in detail how all  2050, it will be necessary to prevent most emissions in 
aspects of climate targets are to be achieved by 2050.  the energy sector and energy-related emissions in the 
But it is important to put milestones, consistent path- building and transport sectors, as well as in industry 
ways and strategic measures in place.  and business. CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050K /L CIMABAISNCEHTU RTEZSPOLLAUNT 2I0O5N0 29
This will require taking advantage of potential efficien- particularly given the objective of greenhouse gas neu-
cies (“efficiency first”) and directly using renewable  trality no later than the second half of the century as 
energy sources in the various sectors to the extent this is  specified by the Paris Agreement. The German govern-
possible and environmentally and economically feasible.  ment will therefore include the future development of 
The remaining energy requirement will be covered by  this sector in its Climate Action Plan.
CO-free renewable electricity (sector coupling). This is 
2
succeeding in the transport sector due to the introduc- Emissions from international aviation and shipping are 
tion and increased popularity of direct electric drive  anthropogenic emissions that must be part of the effort 
technologies and – prospectively – the use of electricity- to achieve the long-term goal of greenhouse gas neu-
based fuel sources, including for aviation and shipping,  trality as specified by the Paris Agreement. The German 
based on a CO -neutral power supply. In the buildings  government supports ongoing processes taking place as 
2
sector, electricity from renewable energy sources (used  part of international cooperation at ICAO (International 
in heat pumps, for example) is playing an increasingly  Civil Aviation Organization) and the IMO (International 
important role – along with other renewable energy  Maritime Organization) and is committed to ensuring 
sources – in supplying heat. This offers additional op- that both sectors make an ambitious contribution to 
tions for making electricity demand by the buildings and  achieving global greenhouse gas neutrality. Although 
transport sectors more flexible (for example by storing  international emissions will not be directly included in 
electricity in vehicle batteries or heat in heating plants),  future national climate targets, the German government 
thereby improving the ability to use renewables in en- will keep emissions by those sectors which are attribut-
ergy systems. As Germany makes further progress in  able to Germany in mind when assessing the achieve-
implementation, there will be more interaction among  ment of climate targets and take appropriate steps to 
the energy, transport and buildings sectors, and industry  reduce them within the limits of what is feasible at the 
(sector coupling). The German government will actively  national level.
work to influence this interaction. Generating electricity 
will play a key role in CO-neutral development of the  Climate action is an important principle, but it is not the 
2
buildings, transport, and industrial sectors. only long-term principle guiding the German govern-
ment’s policies. When deciding how to transition to a 
Continuous improvements in energy efficiency and  greenhouse gas-neutral economy and society, it will be 
energy conservation are an integral part of the decar- particularly necessary to take the management rules, 
bonisation strategy that will make it possible to meet  targets, and other requirements of the government’s 
the additional need for renewable power generation  sustainability strategy into account. Climate action that 
as part of further expanding renewable generation  is successful over the long term must go hand in hand 
capacities. This will also make an important contribu- with sustainable use and conservation of resources and 
tion to an Energiewende that is resource-efficient and  must not threaten the preservation of biodiversity. With 
environmentally friendly. a view to meeting the 17 Sustainable Development Goals 
(SDGs) of the United Nations, the focus should be on re-
The German government’s climate targets have pre- ducing greenhouse gases by increasing energy efficiency. 
viously included only emissions that can be directly  Social and economic requirements must be considered 
attributed to the parties under the rules of the Kyoto  when structuring the transformation.
Protocol. They do not include carbon dioxide emissions 
(or sequestration) from land use and forestry, or those  The German government’s climate policy will support 
emissions from international aviation and shipping  economically successful development in Germany and 
which are attributable to Germany.  Europe – driven, for example, by businesses stepping 
up their innovation activities, increased investment in 
Accounting for emissions from land use and forestry  climate-friendly technologies, and greater company 
is subject to considerable methodological difficulties.  productivity based on increasing efficiency while sim-
Therefore, the German government does not include  ultaneously reducing burdens on the environment.
this sector directly in the national climate targets. 
However, this sector also has the potential ability to 
avoid emissions and to sequester carbon dioxide in 
forests and soil. This sector is of long-term importance, 30 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
4.3   Promoting climate action 
and internationally. Germany is a major partner in 
at all levels – Climate  international development cooperation and is among 
the largest donors in the field of international climate 
action as a societal project
action. German development cooperation work pro-
motes reform processes in multilateral organisations 
Broad swaths of the population in Germany consider  in line with Agenda 2030 and the Paris Agreement. 
climate action and environmental protection to be  The German government plans to provide some  
essential for competitiveness, prosperity and solving  2.4 billion euros in international climate finance 
global problems. The 2014 environmental awareness  through the federal budget in 2016.
study confirms that there is great interest in areas 
such as new forms of mobility in cities, energy- The NDC Partnership, a global partnership initiated 
efficient products, green investment, and green elec- by the German government in 2016 to support the 
tricity – important parameters on the way to green- implementation of Nationally Determined Contri-
house gas neutrality. Broad agreement by the public  butions, is to play a central role in orienting climate 
is and will remain a crucial element underpinning  and development financing to the targets of the Paris 
German climate policy. The burdens of climate ac- Agreement. Developing countries and emerging 
tion measures must be balanced in a way that is fair  economies will receive the support they need to im-
to all sections of society. The voluntary nature of  plement their climate commitments, paving the way 
measures that change aspects of people’s lives can  to making the revised NDCs more ambitious.
be supplemented by targeted regulation. Many ex-
amples show that this can help advance innovation  In the field of development cooperation, the Federal 
in both the public and the private sectors. Ministry for Economic Cooperation and Develop-
ment supports measures that will allow climate 
Future climate action will be successful only if it is  action and sustainable development to be achieved 
considered and implemented at all levels and by all  together. Initiatives are currently concentrated in 
stakeholders. Intensive research efforts and new ap- the areas of energy (including the energy transition 
proaches to research and innovation will be needed  in Africa through the Africa Renewable Energy Ini-
in along with efforts by the public, businesses and  tiative, AREI), climate risk insurance, forests (African 
politicians.
For Germany it is self-evident that, commitments in 
the area of climate action at the European and inter-
national levels must be taken seriously. The German 
government is also working to get other countries 
involved in the transition to a green economy and to 
set transformation processes in motion.
The German government supports international 
climate activities as part of bilateral and multilat-
eral programmes and funds; funding activities in 
the context of development cooperation relevant to 
climate (Federal Ministry for Economic Cooperation 
and Development) and climate financing provided 
by the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature 
Conservation, Building and Nuclear Safety (BMUB) 
are cohesive and complementary. Most international 
climate financing is provided by the Federal Ministry 
for Economic Cooperation and Development. Ger-
man climate financing includes projects to reduce 
greenhouse gases, adapt to climate change, and 
protect forests and biodiversity, including as part of 
REDD+. Cooperation with the private sector and civil 
society is increasingly important, both in Germany CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 31
Forest Landscape Restoration Initiative, AFR100),  It will also be essential at the national level to in-
marine and coastal protection (ten-point action plan  clude the Länder, local authorities, and associations, 
for marine protection and sustainable fisheries),  as well as the public, in climate action strategies 
transport (particularly funding for sustainable mo- and measures at an early stage (see Section 6). When 
bility systems in urban areas), and adaptation to cli- updating the Sustainable Development Strategy and 
mate change (NAP [National adaptation plan] Global  preparing the German report on the implementation 
Network). Approaches to development cooperation  of Agenda 2030, it became apparent that early public 
are also consistently oriented to the implementa- participation is particularly important for improving 
tion of NDCs. The Federal Ministry for Economic  the acceptance of outcomes and leads to stronger 
Cooperation and Development also supports partner  identification with individual projects. This is also 
countries in promoting a circular economy and re- confirmed by experience with informal participation 
source efficiency in industrial production, thereby  processes involving the Länder, local authorities, as-
contributing to sustainable, climate-friendly eco- sociations, and the public in preparing this plan. The 
nomic development.  German government will continue to develop a cul-
ture of participation in the context of climate action, 
The German government created the International  thereby initiating and strengthening learning and 
Climate Initiative (IKI) in 2008 to provide additional  innovation processes. It is guided in particular by 
support for cooperation with developing countries  the criteria of certain UN Sustainable Development 
and emerging economies in the areas of climate  Goals: achieving gender equality (SDG 5), reducing 
change mitigation and biodiversity protection. As an  inequality (SDG 10), and effective and inclusive pub-
instrument for climate financing, the IKI serves as a  lic institutions (governance; SDG 16).
catalyst for both local measures and the UNFCCC 
process – with a funding volume totalling some  In addition to opportunities for participation, the 
1.7 billion euros since the programme was created in  public needs easily accessible ways to participate, for 
2008. The IKI’s current programme planning focuses  example at the district or neighbourhood level, be-
on supporting the NDCs agreed to by partner coun- cause this enhances understanding of and commit-
tries at the Climate Change Conference in Paris.  ment to climate action. It will be important for local 
authorities, the Länder, businesses, and organisa-
The German government also supports many different  tions – in some cases with financial support from the 
national climate action activities, particularly through  German government – to provide information, offer 
the National Climate Initiative (NKI). The NKI includes  education and training programmes and strengthen 
funding programmes for target groups such as local  ongoing efforts by giving them appropriate recog-
authorities, educational institutions, companies, and  nition. Going beyond this, innovative research and 
consumers, as well as strategic projects to provide  development projects are serving as models for 
information, advice and support to those groups and  increasing the awareness of all members of society 
help them build capacity. A key task of the NKI is to  and helping to change behaviour over the long term 
reinforce climate action by local authorities. The   (for example the Efficiency House Plus). Those that 
Local Authorities Guideline offers financial support  are successful must be permanently established and 
for a wide range of climate action measures and has  expanded. At the national and international levels, 
funded some 8,000 projects in 3,000 local authorities  the German government supports initiatives to help 
since 2008. One area of emphasis is “masterplan local  continue environmental and social improvements 
authorities,” which receive special funding to enable  along supply chains (such as the Sustainable Cocoa 
them to reach their climate targets (funding is subject  Forum and the Partnership for Sustainable Textiles) 
to achieving a 95 percent decrease in greenhouse gases  and to minimise Germany’s participation in prac-
compared with 1990 by 2050 and a 50 percent reduc- tices that have detrimental effects on climate at the 
tion in energy use compared with 1990 by 2050). local level. 5 
Targets and measures
Based on the climate targets for 2050 (see Section 4.2),  transport, industry, agriculture, land use and forestry. 
the Climate Action Plan formulates guiding prin- It also sets out overarching targets and measures.
ciples, milestones and measures for all areas of action. 
Like the Climate Action Programme 2020, the Climate  The guiding principle outlines a vision for 2050 for 
Action Plan 2050 defines the areas of action on the  each area of action, while milestones and measures 
basis of the source principle generally used in inter- focus on 2030. 
national greenhouse gas reporting. Under this prin-
ciple, emissions arising, for instance, from the use of  An evaluation of available climate scenarios and 
electric household appliances are attributed to the  analyses of the transformation needed in the different 
energy sector as the “source” of the electricity and  areas of action helped inform these guiding principles 
hence of the emissions. Assuming that sector coupling  and milestones. 
is successfully achieved, this will have to be taken into 
account when measuring reductions made in the en- In line with the interim target for 2030 already set by 
ergy sector. The Climate Action Plan 2050 addresses  the German government (First Progress Report on the 
the areas of action concerned with energy, buildings,  Energiewende, 2014 and Fourth Monitoring Report CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 33
Table 2:   Emissions from areas of action set out in definition of the target:
1990   2014   2030   2030 (reduction in %
(in million tonnes of  (in million tonnes of  (in million tonnes of  compared with 
Area of action CO equivalent) CO equivalent) CO equivalent)  1990)
2 2 2
Energy sector 466 358 175 – 183 62 – 61 %
Buildings 209 119 70 – 72 67 – 66 %
Transport 163 160 95 – 98 42 – 40 %
Industry 283 181 140 – 143 51 – 49 %
Agriculture 88 72 58 – 61 34 – 31 %
Subtotal 1,209 890 538 – 557 56 – 54 %
Other 39 12 5 87 %
Total 1,248 902 543 – 562 56 – 55 %
Source: Climate Action Plan 2050 of the Federal Government
on the Energiewende, 2015), Germany's total green- businesses, employees and trade unions, underpinned 
house gas emissions need to be reduced by at least  by a broad scientific knowledge base. In 2018, we will 
55 percent compared with 1990 by 2030 at the latest  analyse the results, carry out impact assessments and 
(reference value: 1248 million tonnes total emissions  identify potential opportunities, risks and uncertain-
of CO equivalent). The table below gives a breakdown  ties to ascertain what options for action we have and 
2
for each area of action, showing their envisaged con- where modifications are necessary. We will also work 
tributions to achieving that target. Some of the sector  towards ensuring that the individual sectors take re-
targets below could have a far-reaching impact on  sponsibility for meeting the reduction targets set in 
our economic and social development. A comprehen- this Climate Action Plan by 2030. 
sive impact assessment will therefore be carried out, 
the results of which will be discussed with the social  The Climate Action Plan will be updated at regular 
partners, thus allowing adjustments to be made to the  intervals. We will also review whether technical pro-
sectoral targets in 2018. gress and economic developments that cannot cur-
rently be foreseen and the sector coupling happening 
The measures developed were informed by a broad- in these reduction corridors indicate that adjustments 
based process of dialogue and participation, in which  between the corridors need to be made. In this way, 
a range of different groups were able to feed in their  we are building in flexibility without jeopardising the 
proposals and familiarise themselves with the points  possibility of meeting the climate targets. For that 
of view of the other groups. Participants included the  reason, we have not spelt out in detail all the meas-
Länder, local authorities, associations and members   ures to be taken by 2030. To that end, the Plan will be 
of the public. Together they developed a catalogue  fleshed out at a later date with a detailed programme 
with almost 100 proposals for measures. (compare   of measures (see Section 6). The regular updating pro-
www.bmub.bund.de/P3915-1/). cess makes it possible for the German government’s 
first Climate Action Plan 2050 to focus on taking the 
Based on the Climate Action Plan 2050, we will now  key steps and putting the necessary strategic measures 
continue the dialogue with the affected sectors,  in place.34 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
5.1   Climate action in the  other sectors. The degree to which the energy sector’s 
provision of electricity and heat from renewable energy 
energy sector
sources contributes to the decarbonisation of other 
sectors depends on the extent to which the switch to 
Initial situation renewable energy sources succeeds. In this process the 
following principle must be applied: first of all, energy 
Climate policy and energy policy are inextricably  demand must be significantly and permanently re-
linked. Effective climate action is inconceivable with- duced in all sectors (“efficiency first”), secondly renew-
out a sustainable energy policy because the energy sec- able energy must be directly used in all sectors insofar 
tor accounts for some 40 percent of Germany’s green- as it is feasible and makes economic sense, and thirdly 
house gas emissions (as at 2014). The greenhouse gas  electricity from renewable sources if used for heat pro-
neutrality goal, which is enshrined in the Paris Agree- vision, the transport sector and industry (sector coup-
ment, underlines the necessity of gradually phasing out  ling) it must be used efficiently. 
the combustion of fossil fuels to produce energy. The 
energy supply must be almost completely decarbonised  At 358 million tonnes of CO equivalent, the energy 
2
by 2050 at the latest. sector’s emissions in 2014 were about 23 percent below 
1990 levels (466 million tonnes of CO equivalent).  
2
The Energiewende has triggered an unparalleled  Germany’s 2015/16 Projection Report shows that, if  
change in the energy sector. Within just a few years,  the climate measures already agreed – including the 
renewable energy has ceased to be a niche technology  Climate Action Programme 2020 and the National  
and is now Germany’s principal source of electricity.  Action Plan on Energy Efficiency – were systematically 
We intend to continue to drive forward this develop- implemented, emissions could fall to approximately 
ment. Renewable electricity will be the key energy  295 million tonnes of CO equivalent by 2020 (such as 
2
source in Germany’s future energy system. That means  by about 37 percent compared with 1990). 
that it will also be used in the heat and transport sec-
tor to operate heat pumps and drive electric cars, for 
example.  
The modernisation of the energy sector resulting from 
the Energiewende is one of our country’s major invest-
ment projects. For example, in 2014, new investments 
worth some 19 billion euros were made in renewable 
energy facilities. Another eight billion euros were in-
vested by grid operators in grid infrastructure. 
Germany’s Energiewende and the gradual restruc-
turing of its energy supply towards more renewable 
energy and a higher level of energy efficiency has set 
the course for future development. Despite the associ-
ated structural adjustments and “learning costs” new 
economic opportunities have evolved and innovations 
have been developed. Renewable energy accounted for 
32 percent of electricity demand in 2015, the majority 
coming from wind power (13.3 percent) and photo-
voltaics (6.5 percent). That makes renewables the most 
important source of electricity in Germany. 
The energy sector's emissions include all emissions 
arising from the combustion of fossil fuels in power 
stations used to supply electricity and heat to the pub-
lic. Therefore, emissions from the energy industry are 
also influenced by the electricity and heat demand of CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 35
Guiding principle for 2050 and   strategies for using  biogenic resources, with energy 
transformation pathway recovery only occurring at the end of a cascade of uses.
Renewables will be the principal source of energy in  The transformation of the electricity supply towards 
the future. The energy demand of buildings, transport  a system based on renewable energy sources by 2050, 
and industry will drop sharply as a result of increas- while maintaining supply security, is technically feas-
ingly efficient use of energy. The remaining demand  ible. The key challenge is to balance production and 
will be met by renewables – directly in the individual  consumption at all times, while at the same time en-
sectors or indirectly in the form of renewable electri- suring that electricity remains affordable for con-
city. This will mean that the electricity sector will be  sumers. This requires efficient smart grids to connect 
increasingly “coupled” with the buildings sector, trans- the centres of generation and consumption and bal-
port sector and industry. Renewable fuels (for example  ance supply and demand. With its new Electricity Mar-
biomass) will increasingly be used wherever it is not  ket Act, the German government has created a regula-
feasible to use electricity, especially in aviation and  tory framework to balance generation and consump-
shipping and some parts of industry. tion flexibly and efficiently. This framework facilitates 
fair competition among the various flexibility options. 
Based on current knowledge, greater sector coupling  On the basis of effective price signals, market players 
will mean that electricity demand will in the long term  have a free choice of which flexibility option to use. 
be significantly higher than today. Even allowing for  This keeps the overall costs of the electricity supply low 
simultaneous efforts to improve energy efficiency, a  and is an incentive for innovation.
perceptible rise is anticipated, especially after 2030, as a 
result of the increasing electrification of the transport  As transitional technologies low-CO natural gas power 
2
sector and the heat supply to buildings. Current fore- stations and the most modern existing coal-fired power 
casts on long-term electricity demand vary greatly be- stations have an important function, especially com-
cause they are based on widely differing assumptions,  bined heat and power generation that is geared to the 
in particular with regard to the extent to which energy  electricity market and can be ramped up or down flex-
efficiency will rise. The German government works on  ibly depending on the availability of electricity from 
the basis of an “efficiency first” principle, seeing it as  solar or wind power at any given moment. 
the only way to adequately limit demand and ensure 
that the increased use of renewable energy can be car- The impact on the regional economy of all measures 
ried out in a way that conserves resources and does not  resulting from the Climate Action Plan are taken into 
impact negatively on nature. account and flanked with regional policies. 
In the long term, electricity generation must be almost  It will only be possible to meet the climate targets if 
entirely based on renewable energy sources. By 2050,  coal-fired electricity production is gradually reduced. 
biomass will contribute to energy provision to a limited  When steering this development, it is essential to take 
extent, largely based on obtaining energy from waste  the economic outlook and jobs in the affected regions 
and slurry, fermentation products and residues, in local  into account. Above all, it is necessary to open up tan-
applications to provide thermal energy for industry,  gible prospects for these regions before definite deci-
commerce, trade, and services and the heat sector. The  sions about gradually pulling out of the lignite indus-
biological processes involved in crop cultivation mean  try can be taken. To do this, we need a regional and 
it is not possible to reduce emissions from the produc- industrial policy strategy, which proactively shapes 
tion of cultivated biomass to zero. Because the energy  structural change and supports businesses and their 
supply has to be almost entirely decarbonised by 2050  workforce in adapting to new regional structures. The 
at the latest and because land is needed to produce  German government will therefore work at European 
food, the significance of the contribution to mitigat- Union level to ensure that European competition law 
ing climate change made by bioenergy from cultivated  does not present an obstacle to public funding being 
biomass will be limited. By contrast, the use of bioen- used to encourage investment and attracts companies to 
ergy from residues and waste products will make an  former lignite mining areas. This funding will be made 
important contribution to cross-sectoral energy provi- available through relevant regional funds. It is after 
sion and it will be possible to fully harness its sustain- all in the interest of Europe as a whole that Germany 
able potential. Here it is important to develop efficient  makes its disproportionately large contribution to 36 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
Europe’s climate action. But this can only succeed if the  Milestones for 2030
affected regions and workforce acquire new employment 
prospects and an opportunity for economic success  With regard to the 2030 target, it is obvious that 
and social security. Otherwise the Energiewende will  the energy sector has to make an appropriate con-
lose credibility – both within Germany and also on a  tribution to the overall reduction target. Here the 
European and international level. The German govern- additional electricity demand from the buildings 
ment already reached an agreement with the Länder  and transport sector, resulting from sector coupling, 
in 2016 to allocate funding totalling 7.3 million euros  needs to be taken into account. In line with the in-
in the next four years to districts in the Lausitz region  terim target for 2030, the energy sector has to cut its 
as part of the Joint Task for the Improvement of the  greenhouse gas emissions to between 175 and 183 
Regional Economic Structure. That means that the first  million tonnes of CO equivalent by 2030. Further 
2
regional development projects in the Lausitz can begin  reductions are also needed in the period after 2030 
as early as the beginning of 2017. This funding will have  to meet the climate target for 2050.
to be extended and/or made available by using existing 
instruments. All future measures will have to take the structural 
change in the energy sector into account. They will 
Today, global investment in renewable electricity gen- have to be designed in such a way that the energy 
eration capacity is  significantly higher than that in add- sector can guarantee a secure and affordable energy 
itional fossil fuel power stations. This trend will rise in  supply both now and in the future and provide 
the next years and will bring about further cost reduc- high-quality jobs.
tions. The signs of a turnaround in trends can currently 
be seen, especially with regard to coal-fired power sta- Wind and solar electricity’s share in overall electri-
tions, the leading source of greenhouse gas emissions  city production is rising significantly. Because these 
in the energy sector worldwide: numerous projects  technologies currently hold a great deal of cost-ef-
on which planning began in the last ten years have  fective potential they are being massively expanded 
now been shelved. An increasing number of investors  in line with the German government’s goals. They 
are withdrawing their capital from the coal industry.  dominate and characterise the system. 
German development cooperation is no longer pro-
viding support to build new coal-fired power stations 
or retrofit those that have already been mothballed. 
Providing finance to modernise coal-fired power sta-
tions is permitted only in exceptional cases, if stringent 
criteria are fulfilled and if it can be reconciled with the 
partner country’s ambitious climate strategy. The fact 
that electricity is gaining importance worldwide as a 
means of decarbonising the transport and heating sec-
tors is boosting investment in renewable energy. Fur-
thermore, the potential for sustainable use of bioenergy 
is currently thought to be far lower than it was a few 
years ago, both outside and within Germany. The global 
increase in demand for agricultural commodities for 
a wide range of uses is also limiting the potential for 
sustainable use of bioenergy. 
Since the majority of air pollutants and greenhouse 
gases emitted by the energy sector come from the same 
sources, there are distinct synergies here between cli-
mate change mitigation and air quality control.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050K /L CIMABAISNCEHTU RTEZSPOLLAUNT 2I0O5N0 37
Combined heat and power production, preferably  The EU Emissions Trading System remains the key 
based on natural gas, will continue to play an im- European climate instrument and ensures that Euro-
portant role. It is also becoming increasingly flex- pean climate targets are met. Many EU member 
ible, producing lower emissions and incorporating  states, including Germany, use a broad portfolio 
renewable heat production, so that it will be gradu- of different climate policy measures to achieve 
ally become possible to completely phase out fossil  higher national climate targets. For example, fund-
fuels in this sector too.  ing for renewable energy, the Combined Heat and 
Power Act, the plans to transfer a certain capacity 
Businesses’ investment cycles should in future take  of lignite-fired power stations into a reserve before 
the medium and long-term climate targets into  being phased out completely four years later (de-
account in order to avoid stranded investments or  commissioning/standby), or measures to improve 
high adaptation costs. This has consequences for  energy efficiency have an impact on the energy sec-
investment decisions. Conversely, it is important for  tor’s emissions. National climate change mitigation 
investment decisions that regulatory decisions re- measures in this sector need to take the effect on 
lating to the implementation of climate targets re- European climate policy into account.
main predictable and that they do not intervene at 
short intervals in businesses’ investment cycles. The  Electricity will continue to be a “precious resource” 
reduction in coal-fired electricity production should  because the increased use of renewable energy neces-
be organised in such a way that structural breaks in  sitates land and public support and is to some extent 
the affected regions, especially the lignite mining  at odds with nature and landscape conservation con-
areas in North Rhine-Westphalia, the Lausitz and  cerns. This is why the German government prioritises 
the Central German Coalfield, are avoided and   energy efficiency, which makes a major contribution 
new prospects for industry in these regions are de- to ensuring that the country’s Energiewende can 
veloped. To achieve that, we need a dialogue with  take place in a resource-efficient and nature-friendly 
the actors involved from the business sector, the  way. This includes ensuring that gross electricity con-
regions and the trade unions.  sumption falls below today’s level by 2030. 38 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
The energy supply of the future will be digital. Digit-
isation applies to all stages of the energy value 
chain. New efficiency potential is being identified 
as increasingly large volumes of data are analysed. 
Modern technologies can be used to create smart 
connections between electricity grids and electricity 
generation and consumers, for example. This may 
reduce the need for new grids. 
With its Act on the Digitisation of the Energy Tran-
sition, the German government has laid the founda-
tion for the infrastructure of the future. Smart grids 
and smart metering systems are the future. Data 
protection and data security, along with reliable 
standards, are crucial elements in successfully digit-
ising the Energiewende. The high standards of the 
Digitisation Act takes this into account. 
In terms of conserving energy and resources,  
digitisation will also harness great potential. This is  
particularly true of smart buildings, opportunities  includes implementation of the Climate Action Pro-
for optimising transport, and smart production   gramme 2020 and the National Action Plan on En-
systems.  ergy Efficiency (NAPE).
The Energiewende will only succeed if we signifi- Green Paper on Energy Efficiency– a mile-
cantly and permanently continue to increase energy 
stone for an ambitious efficiency strategy
efficiency. With the National Action Plan on Energy 
Efficiency (NAPE), in December 2014 the German  With its Green Paper on Energy Efficiency, the 
government presented a comprehensive raft of  Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy 
measures to increase energy efficiency and has now  (BMWi) initiated a broad-based consultation pro-
implemented all the key measures.  cess (www.bmwi.de/Redaktion/EN/Dossier/energy-
efficiency.html). The process will culminate in a 
Energy efficiency is a cross-cutting issue that plays  medium to long-term strategy for efficient energy 
an important role in every area of action; for that  use in Germany aimed at reducing consumption.
reason specific measures are detailed in the corres-
ponding sections.
At the heart of the consultation is the question of 
Measures how the principle of prioritising avoidance and re-
duction of energy consumption can be enshrined in 
The key national measures for the energy industry  the planning and steering processes of energy policy 
adopted by the German government are the in- and the energy market. It also explores questions 
creased use of renewable energy and combined heat  such as what set of instruments is needed and to 
and power generation, and the provisions under the  what extent digitisation and sector coupling impact 
Electricity Market Act on decommissioning/standby  on the development of energy efficiency. 
for lignite-fired power plants. The Emissions Trading 
System remains the key instrument at European level. Based on the consultation process, conclusions and 
recommendations for action will be compiled in a 
These instruments are supported by all the measures  White Paper on Energy Efficiency. These recommen-
on the demand side that limit electricity, heat and  dations for action will subsequently be updated at 
cooling demand from power stations in the public  regular intervals to reflect the progress made in im-
supply system by increasing energy efficiency. That  plementing them.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 39
Increasing the use of renewable energy 
The basis of the consultation is the Energiewende 
"triad" consisting of energy efficiency, directly used re-
The increased use of renewable energy will continue  newable energy and efficient use of renewable electri-
to play a key role in the years to come. Any measures  city for the heating and transport sector, and industry. 
taken will be mindful of the goals of nature conserva-
tion. The 2017 Renewable Energy Sources Act reaf- The consultation process addresses the decisive issues 
firmed Germany’s ambitious goals in this area.  that arise on the path towards the energy system of the 
future. They include, for example, the integration of 
Achieving these goals will require further effort. In  electricity generated by wind and solar power, the de-
particular, further progress on developing the grid is  clining importance of fossil fuels and how to organise 
needed for the integration of renewable energy into  sector coupling. 
the electricity supply system. 
The consultation process serves to take note of where 
With its 2017 Renewable Energy Sources Act, the Ger- there is consensus among the actors involved and, in 
man government has introduced a paradigm shift.  cases where positions diverge, to record the entire spec-
The level of payments which producers of renewable  trum of opinion. 
electricity receive will in future no longer be stipu-
lated by the government. Instead it will be ascertained  Advancing sector coupling
on the basis of a tendering process. This competitive 
approach will make it possible to continue along the  The strategy on decarbonising the electricity sector 
renewables pathway while keeping costs as low as  depends on energy efficiency and increasing the use 
possible and controlling the level of expansion.  of renewable energy. But also the heat and cooling  
sector and the transport sector (drive systems) will 
Local community energy projects contribute a great  only be able to make the emission reductions required 
deal to public understanding and support for the En- by 2050 if renewable electricity (for example heat pumps, 
ergiewende and the expansion of renewable energy  electric vehicles) is used – after efficiency potential 
use. For that reason, it is crucial to maintain the diver- has been harnessed and direct sources of renewable 
sity of actors involved.  energy exhausted (for example heat from solar thermal 
or geothermal sources) is met in the future. Sector coup-
On the basis of reports on experience and monitoring  ling can also bring greater flexibility into the electric-
reports, the German government will ensure that the  ity market, if consumers in the heat and transport 
medium and long-term climate targets are met. sector adjust their demand by many gigawatts very 
quickly. Fluctuating electricity provided by wind or 
Electricity 2030 – a milestone on the path  solar power can be balanced in this way. 
towards an energy system fit for the future 
In order to achieve extensive decarbonisation in 
The next years will see the course for 2050 being set in  these sectors by 2050, efficient technologies must be 
the energy sector. Buildings, power stations and in- used which maximise the replacement of fossil fuels 
dustrial installations are often in use for over 40 years.  while using as little renewable electricity as possible. 
Investments made in the 2020s and 2030s will there- One of the key factors here is to improve the com-
fore influence the energy system in 2050.  petitive conditions for renewable electricity in the 
heat and transport sector. Thus far, fossil fuels for 
The Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy  transport and heat have been less expensive for con-
(BMWi) has launched a comprehensive consultation  sumers than electricity, because through surcharges, 
process entitled Electricity 2030. The idea is to as- taxes and levies, electricity makes a greater contribu-
certain the tasks to be tackled on the basis of twelve  tion to financing the Energiewende. Key questions 
trends that have been identified. The aim is to ensure  of developing sector coupling are being discussed in 
that the transition to an overall system in which re- the consultation processes for the Green Paper on 
newable electricity is the major source of energy is  Energy Efficiency and Electricity 2030.
cost-efficient both for the national economy and for 
individual businesses. 40 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
Transformation of the financing system  
Research and development
and contributions to revenue 
Funding research and development is of key importance 
The future model for financing an energy supply based  to the success of the Energiewende. Building on and 
on renewables, including the necessary infrastructure,  expanding existing funding programmes and initiatives, 
needs to ensure that all energy-consuming sectors make  a greater proportion of research funds must be allocated 
an appropriate contribution to financing it. This will  to areas such as renewable energy technologies, grids, 
create more sustainable revenue potential for renewable  storage systems, technologies needed for sector coup-
electricity generation, improve the competitive condi- ling (including power-to-gas and power-to-liquid) and 
tions for renewable electricity and facilitate a market- technologies and measures to increase energy efficiency. 
driven breakthrough renewable electricity into other  There is a considerable need for research, especially of 
sectors (sector coupling). The more closely the electricity,  a systemic kind. Our work will also focus on applying 
heat and mobility sectors grow together, the more im- research outcomes in practice. 
portant it will become to achieve a pricing policy which 
embraces the different types of energy (for example  Commission for growth, structural change 
natural gas, heating oil, vehicle fuels, electricity) in their 
and regional development
different applications (conversion/storage, transport or 
direct consumption) that is consistent with mitigating  The transformation process must be based on a policy 
climate change. The German government intends to  aiming for stable growth, sustainable structural 
review the incentive and steering effect of the current  change and future-oriented regional development. 
components of energy prices in the form of levies, sur- For that reason, realistic prospects for the branches 
charges and taxes imposed by the state. and regions affected by this transformation process CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 41
must be developed, the resulting implementation  For this purpose, the industry cap will be raised to 
strategies must be agreed and the necessary financial  45 percent of the total volume of emission allowances 
conditions created. The German government is there- within the ETS (plus the 2.6 percent for the innov-
fore appointing a commission for growth, structural  ation fund). The industry cap will be adjusted if that is 
change and regional development. The commission  necessary to prevent a correction factor. Basically, the 
will be set up at the Federal Ministry for Economic  benchmark is set on the basis of real data and actual 
Affairs and Energy and will involve other government  emissions from the ten percent most greenhouse gas-
departments, along with the Länder, local authorities,  efficient installations. There is no across-the-board re-
trade unions, representatives of affected businesses  duction as suggested in the EU Commission’s proposal. 
and sectors and regional actors. Preparatory work is 
scheduled to begin in the current legislative period  We support the EU Commission’s proposal to endow 
to enable the commission to begin its work at the  the New Entrants Reserve (NER) with 400 million 
start of 2018 and present results preferably by the end  emission allowances. Furthermore, we believe that 
of 2018. To support the structural change, the com- no further emission allowances should be withdrawn 
mission will develop a mix of instruments targeting  from the MSR. We support proposals that the New 
economic development, structural change, social  Entrants Reserve (NER) emission allowances should 
compatibility and climate action. This will include the  be taken not from the MSR, but from the budget for 
investments required in branches and regions affected  the 4th trading period, on the condition that the in-
by the structural change and the financing of these  dustry cap is correspondingly increased by an equiva-
investments. lent number of allowances. 
We support the idea of distributing emission allow-
Strengthening the Emissions Trading  
ances on the basis of certain criteria. This aims at  
System (ETS)
creating a fair balance between safeguarding competi-
The Emissions Trading System is an EU-wide instru- tiveness and ruling out windfall effects. We are seek-
ment; it is not structurally designed to achieve tar- ing to prevent arbitrariness resulting from statistical 
geted emissions reductions in individual countries  reporting on gross value added. 
and sectors and thus ensure national climate targets 
are met. Nonetheless, this instrument does offer a  The carbon leakage list should be reviewed every five 
way to use the price of CO to create centralised price  years to take into account changes in the competition 
2
incentives to reduce CO emissions, thereby support- situation. 
2
ing the achievement of national climate targets. For 
that reason, it is very important to intensify the pric- We also support the European Commission’s plans 
ing signals sent by emissions trading. The German  to continue to allow energy-intensive industries to 
government will work at European level to make the  be compensated, to open the innovation fund to in-
ETS more effective.  dustrial projects and make the allocation of emission 
allowances more closely dependent on actual pro-
The idea behind strengthening emissions trading at  duction. Furthermore, we advocate a revision clause 
European level is to ensure there are adequate incen- to take account of the Paris Agreement.
tives for decarbonising the energy supply and creat-
ing planning certainty for investment decisions.  Furthermore, a regular review process that follows the 
stipulations set out in the Paris Agreement is needed. 
For Germany to remain an attractive location for  The German government advocates reviewing the 
businesses, it is crucially important that the 10 per- success of the already adopted Market Stability Reserve 
cent most greenhouse gas-efficient installations in  (MSR) and ensuring it has the best possible impact. 
the sectors liable to carbon leakage receive 100 per- This includes its impact on the competitiveness of 
cent of the benchmark-based free allocation of emis- industries covered by the Emissions Trading System. 
sion allowances. Furthermore, a correction factor  Coordinated national measures by Member States to 
must be ruled out and higher requirements resulting  help strengthen the incentive effect of the Emissions 
from production growth must be compensated for.  Trading System should also be considered. 42 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
The Strategy on Energy Efficiency in Buildings, which 
5.2   Climate action in the 
has already been adopted, illustrates how the goal of 
buildings sector
achieving a virtually climate-neutral building stock by 
2050 can be achieved through a combination of energy 
efficiency and renewable energy. The key goal of the Al-
Initial situation
liance for Affordable Housing and Building is to retain 
Germany’s towns and cities already offer a high qual- and build affordable housing, in particular for families 
ity of life. In light of the climate targets that have been  with children and people in the low to medium income 
set for 2050, it is also likely that all these towns, cities,  bracket. Given the key importance of both affordable 
villages, neighbourhoods and buildings will steadily  housing and climate change mitigation, the impact 
change. This is because, taking all direct and indirect  of the rising costs of providing housing must be con-
emissions into account, buildings are currently respon- sidered with great sensitivity. 
sible for up to 30 percent of Germany’s greenhouse gas 
emissions (direct emissions only:13 percent). The Ger- The solutions needed here have to be reconciled with 
man government’s Energy Concept calls for a virtually  the social and economic circumstances and the current 
climate-neutral building stock by 2050. The aim of the  challenges in such a way that the necessary invest-
Climate-Friendly Building and Housing Strategy set  ments are made without disproportionately increasing 
out in the government’s Climate Action Programme  the cost of housing. 
2020 is to achieve virtually climate-neutral towns and 
cities by 2050 and to further improve the quality of  In addition to the affordability of housing for tenants, 
life in the process. The UN’s Sustainable Development  the economic situation of owner occupiers and small 
Goal to “make cities and human settlements inclusive,  private landlords, who own about two thirds of all rental 
safe, resilient and sustainable” (SDG 11) provides sound  housing, must be taken into consideration. The majority 
guidance here. are already of pensionable age and that trend is rising.
To this end, the government’s Climate-Friendly Build- The Climate-Friendly Building and Housing Strategy ad-
ing and Housing Strategy takes into account the find- dresses primarily those emissions caused directly by the 
ings of the Strategy on Energy Efficiency in Buildings  operation of residential and non-residential buildings 
and the Alliance for Affordable Housing and Building.  (space heating, cooling and hot water). In greenhouse gas CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 43
climate measures decided to date – including those de-
tailed in the Climate Action Programme 2020 and the Na-
tional Action Plan on Energy Efficiency – emissions could 
fall to approximately 100 million tonnes of CO equiva-
2
lent (such as about 52 percent of 1990 levels) by 2020.
Guiding principle for 2050 and  
transformation pathway
In 2050 towns and cities will be attractive places to 
live, offering a high quality of life for people of all 
ages and income groups – with comfortable and 
age-appropriate housing, adequate green space, at-
tractive social meeting places and everything within 
easy reach. Modern technologies, use of sustainable 
building materials and intelligent spatial and urban 
planning can help to create places of this kind, while 
at the same time drastically reducing the output of 
greenhouse gases. The German government’s goal 
here is to create a liveable, affordable and virtually 
climate-neutral building stock. The latter refers to 
buildings with a very low energy demand which is 
met by renewables, and which avoid direct green-
reporting, these emissions are predominantly allocated  house gas emissions. The German government’s 
to the household and industry, commerce, trade and ser- Energy Concept aims to lower the primary energy 
vices sectors. In addition to these direct emissions, a sig- demand in the buildings sector by at least 80 percent 
nificant volume of emissions are produced in upstream  compared with 2008 levels by 2050 through a combi-
and downstream sectors such as the energy sector, as a  nation of increasing efficiency and using renewable 
result of district heating being supplied to buildings and  energy. This will be based on three components of the 
electricity for heat pumps, ventilation, operating cooling  energy policy set out for guidance in the Green Paper 
and air conditioning systems and lighting in buildings.  on Energy Efficiency: efficiency first, direct use of 
However, these emissions are not discussed here but  renewable energy and sector coupling.
in the section on the energy sector. The Climate Action 
Plan addresses the totality of heat, cooling and electrici- Greenhouse gas reduction involves working to-
ty consumption needed to operate both residential and  wards creating compact, energy-saving settlement 
non-residential buildings.  structures. Spatial planning will make an important 
contribution to achieving this and avoiding rebound 
If we look at the historical development in the two  effects caused by long distances between home and 
sectors relevant for direct emissions from buildings, it  the place of work.
can be seen that the household sector, where there was 
a reduction from 131 million tonnes of CO equivalent  If Germany is to achieve its goal of making its build-
2
in 1990 to 85 million tonnes in 2014, and the industry,  ing stock virtually climate-neutral by 2050, it is 
commerce, trade and services sector, where emissions  crucial that the available potential for avoiding 
fell from 78 million tonnes to 34 million tonnes of CO  emissions be fully exploited over the next years and 
2
equivalent, have already witnessed a significant reduc- decades and that stranded investments are avoided. 
tion in direct emissions (not adjusted for weather con- Compared with many other types of investment, 
ditions). This means that overall the buildings sector  buildings have a long service life of many decades 
accounted for 119 million tonnes of CO equivalent in  and their fixed building services, which are energy 
2
direct emissions in 2014. and climate-related investments, also have long ser-
vice lives of over 20 years. It is therefore exception-
The German Projection Report for 2015/16 indicates  ally important to construct new buildings in a way 
that, given extremely ambitious implementation of the  that means they no longer have to rely on fossil fuels 44 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
in the future, ensuring that switching to renewable  The Strategy on Energy Efficiency in Buildings also 
energy sources is as simple, economical, and cost ef- highlights the fact that different types of buildings 
fective as possible. It is important that federal govern- have to be rated very differently. For example, the en-
ment funding programmes also create incentives to  ergy profiles for heating, cooling, ventilation, lighting 
invest in energy efficiency and renewable energy in  and hot water demand in residential buildings differs 
buildings. Climate action in the buildings sector pri- significantly from that of non-residential buildings. 
marily involves the necessity of a long-term, reliable  The differences also apply to what type of energy is 
and extensive investment and modernisation pro- used for what purpose: whereas energy in residential 
gramme, accompanied by research and development  buildings is used primarily for heating, electricity 
funding to close technology gaps.   consumption is often the predominant feature of 
energy profiles in non-residential buildings. For that 
It is important to take into account that individual  reason, the values cited above should be seen as aver-
ownership is a key feature of the ownership structure  ages and should be broken down by type of build-
of residential buildings in Germany and that these  ing so that specific efficiency and renewable energy 
private individuals are  to be targeted with incentives.  measures can be developed. 
It is crucial that the mix of small private landlords, 
housing companies, groups of owners of different  The Strategy on Energy Efficiency in Buildings also 
types, and housing cooperatives is preserved and that  shows that for the period from 2030 onwards, the 
social housing is not neglected. Modernisation activ- longevity of structural components, building mater-
ities by private owners are usually dependent on their  ials and technical systems will be crucial in deciding 
level of wealth, stage of life, and the use of the prop- what constellation of efficiency and use of differ-
erty. Numerous private owners of houses and flats are  ent renewable energy sources is needed to achieve a 
already of pensionable age and that trend is rising.  virtually climate-neutral building stock by 2050 and 
avoid lock-in effects. Further progress on a significant 
The Strategy on Energy Efficiency in Buildings, which  scale will also be needed on both levels – efficiency 
the German Government adopted in 2015 as part of  and the use of renewable energy. Solid, liquid or gase-
the country’s Energiewende, focuses on all types of  ous biomass can only be sustainably used to a limited 
energy consumption relevant to buildings with the  extent because interactions within the overall system 
aim of achieving a virtually climate-neutral build- must be taken into account (see Sections 5.5 and 5.6). 
ing stock by 2050. The Climate-Friendly Building  When using solid bioenergy fuels, care must be taken 
and Housing Strategy also integrates urban design,  to ensure that they are from legal and sustainable 
social and spatial planning aspects that are just as  sources. If wood is used as a source of energy it is vital 
important as energy issues for housing in the future.  to ensure that it comes from legal and sustainable 
Climate action in the buildings sector therefore has 
to target emissions produced by operating a building 
on the one hand, while being careful to bear in mind 
the time before the building’s service life begins and 
after it ends. 
The Strategy on Energy Efficiency in Buildings sets 
out a robust pathway towards achieving a virtu-
ally climate-neutral building stock, which relies on 
a combination of two major policy components: 
energy efficiency and use of renewable energy. It fo-
cuses on primary energy demand and outlines two 
pathways as margins to work within: an efficiency 
pathway and a renewable energy pathway. The result 
is that in 2050 the entire residential building stock 
will need on average only just less than 40 kilowatt 
hours per square metre per year (kWh/m2a). For non-
residential buildings this average target value, which 
is based on primary energy demand, is approximately 
52 kWh/m2a. These values should be seen as targets 
and are averages for the entire building stock.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 45
forestry operations and the carbon sink function of  Sustainable green urban development must include 
forests should also be borne in mind. Solid bioenergy  providing environmentally friendly transport op-
fuels will also play a significant role in decarbonising  tions that are (easily) accessible and within walking 
the heat sector in future, especially in older buildings  distance. Towns and cities and their surrounding re-
that are difficult to retrofit. gions must be more closely linked by green corridors 
that also act as fresh air corridors. Greening buildings 
Furthermore, climate action requires not only en- (roofs and facades) and keeping the amount of land 
ergy-efficient, low-emission ways of using the build- sealed over as low as possible mitigates the negative 
ing but also building designs that conserve resources  impacts of climate change.
and use sustainable building materials that likewise 
conserve resources as far as possible. Finally, green- In all the transformation pathways towards a virtu-
house gases are emitted when these materials are  ally climate-neutral building stock described here it 
manufactured, used and removed during demolition  is vital that the instruments used are flexible and not 
and part of the goal must be to prevent those emis- limited to any one technology. They must be open to 
sions too. Construction products should be labelled  all so that anticipated technological developments 
with information about their impact on the environ- can be taken into account. Important factors such as 
ment, resource use and health; building designs need  income trends, affordable rents, the population’s age 
to be optimised, flexibility and service life increased  structure and migration movements must also be 
and high-quality recycling facilitated. This will make  considered in measures put in place for buildings.
it possible to build in a more resource and energy-
efficient way. At the same time, the affordability of  Milestones for 2030
buildings, in particular housing, must not be ignored.
2030 marks an important stage on the way to achiev-
The key elements in achieving a virtually climate- ing a virtually climate-neutral building stock; the lon-
neutral building stock are energy efficiency and  gevity of buildings means that it is particularly crucial 
the integration of renewable energy into individual  in this area of action to ensure that the foundation 
buildings. However, concentrating on energy opti- for meeting the target of a virtually climate-neutral 
misation in individual buildings is not enough. The  building stock by 2050 is firmly in place by 2030. To 
use of highly efficient heating networks, especially  meet the interim target for 2030, greenhouse gas 
those of the 4th generation (low-temperature district  emissions in the buildings sector have to be reduced 
heating networks), based to a high degree on renewa- by 70 to 72 million tonnes of CO equivalent. 
2
bles, will also play an important role. Furthermore, 
the trend towards increasing networking, particularly  To achieve a virtually climate-neutral building stock 
using information and communications technology,  in the long term, it is vital that significantly more is 
is making inroads into buildings too. That will make  invested in optimising today’s building stock and 
it increasingly necessary to take an integrated view  that this happens quickly. By 2030 at the latest, the 
which goes beyond individual buildings and takes  regulatory framework must be such that any work to 
into account interactions with the energy and trans- improve the energy performance of existing buildings 
port sectors. That kind of integrative concept makes  meets the virtually climate-neutral benchmark. 
it possible to tackle emissions from the energy supply 
system and direct emissions of fluorinated green- For new buildings completed up to 2030 this means 
house gases (for example heating networks that use   that the energy performance standard for residential 
natural cooling agents). Synergies with other sectors –  and non-residential buildings must be gradually but 
such as smart systems linking fixed building services with   significantly improved from today’s level. The require-
electric mobility, as demonstrated by a project on an   ment for economic efficiency is not questioned here. 
Efficiency House Plus with electric mobility – can be   The German government is therefore putting consid-
better exploited. In the German government's view,   erable funds into monitoring implementation of the 
climate-friendly smart city and smart community   standard. Prime examples include the CO Building 
2
concepts which, in the light of growing urbanisa- Rehabilitation Programme, the Market Incentive Pro-
tion, are increasingly becoming a focus of attention  gramme Promoting Renewable Energies, information 
especially in the international context, should be  services and competence centres. 
supported and funded. Current population trends in 
Germany also need to be taken into account when  At the same time as significantly increasing energy 
developing concepts of this kind. efficiency, renewable energy’s share in final energy 46 KCLLIIMMAATSEC HAUCTTZIOPNLA PNL A20N5 20050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
with regard to use, characteristics and energy demand 
of non-residential buildings. This was already ad-
dressed by the German government’s Climate Action  
Programme 2020. On this basis, and taking into  
account the highly diverse uses of non-residential 
buildings, the government will continue developing 
the energy requirements that non-residential build-
ings have to meet in order to achieve the 2050 target. 
Things such as providing air conditioning for build-
ings that does not use fluorinated greenhouse gases is 
of key importance here.
The energy used to manufacture and recycle buildings 
must in future be minimised as far as possible, taking 
aspects of resource recovery into account. Environ-
mental, economic and health impacts must also be 
taken into consideration. 
Measures
Achieving the goal of making Germany’s building 
stock virtually climate-neutral by 2050 relies on put-
ting in a place an intelligent and balanced mix of 
instruments over the next years and decades, includ-
consumption in buildings in 2030 must be gradually  ing research and innovation, providing information 
increased in order to meet the target of achieving a  advice, and support and creating the regulatory 
virtually climate-neutral building stock by 2050. Fur- framework needed to drive forward the introduction 
ther milestones must be defined on the basis of the  of sustainable buildings, focusing equally on existing 
results achieved by 2020 and the measures needed to  and new buildings. There is already a broad range of 
enable targets to be met must be put in place. regulatory provisions, funding programmes such as 
the CO Building Rehabilitation Programme, the Mar-
2
This must also be accompanied by a significant reduc- ket Incentive Programme Promoting Renewable En-
tion in direct combustion of fossil fuels to provide  ergies and many other existing or planned measures 
space heating and hot water. In a transitional phase,  to provide funding for climate-friendly buildings. 
highly efficient condensing boilers that use fossil fuels  The economic feasibility of the measures and the 
only can make an important contribution to increas- need to ensure building and housing remain afford-
ing efficiency, providing energy and cutting emis- able must be taken into account. To ensure the costs 
sions. To avoid lock-in effects, the funding conditions  arising from buildings having to comply with climate 
will be designed to make heating systems that use  regulations do not prevent owners from refurbishing 
renewable energy a far more attractive option than  them, a programme of government incentives should 
those that use fossil fuels. be continued.
Systems that use renewable energy sources directly  When developing and refining this mix of instru-
and also those that use them indirectly, such as  ments, it is crucial to find the right balance between 
power-to-gas (sustainable combustion gases that are  an appropriate market-based framework, funding 
fed into the gas grid, for example) or power-to-liquid,  programmes, regulatory law and information activ-
are another option that can help achieve the target  ities. A balance between measures to increase energy 
set. efficiency and others to promote the use of renewable 
energy is important here. It is crucial to prevent lock-
One of the primary tasks that still remains to be   in effects and also to take social aspects into account 
tackled is to improve the inadequate data situation  adequately. Training and continual professional CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 47
development are a key factor in meeting the climate  systems in existing buildings are installed for 
targets for buildings (see Section 5.7). the first time or old ones replaced, as high a per-
centage of the heat as possible is supplied from 
Roadmap for achieving a virtually climate- renewable energy sources. The possibility of intro-
ducing a statutory requirement to use a certain 
neutral building stock
proportion of renewable energy during extensive 
Achieving the goal of a virtually climate-neutral  refurbishment in cases where it is economically 
building stock by 2050 depends on ambitious stand- feasible is being reviewed.
ards for new buildings, long-term strategies for 
refurbishing the building stock and a gradual phase  →  In the near future, the German government will use 
out of fossil-fuel heating systems. existing energy-saving legislation to develop a sys-
tem for the building stock that will make it possible 
→  The zero-energy building standard for new build- for building owners to have their building classified 
ings, which will apply from 2021, will therefore be  into different energy performance categories.  
progressively developed until in the medium term 
a virtually climate-neutral standard is reached. That  →  Individual voluntary refurbishment timetables, 
means that by 2030 at the latest the energy standard  which are already a firm part of the Strategy on 
for buildings must be gradually changed until the  Energy Efficiency in Buildings and will be intro-
maximum energy demand specified is significantly  duced in the near future, will identify to what 
lower than that required by today’s Efficiency  extent energy-efficient refurbishment work is 
House 55 standard.   needed to make a building virtually climate-neu-
  tral. As was decided in the German government’s 
This will make installing new heating systems that  Energy Concept, this would make it possible to 
use renewable energy sources efficiently a far more  bring the refurbishment timetable for existing 
attractive option than those that run on fossil fuels. buildings gradually closer to the target standard, 
which is a “virtually climate-neutral building” 
→  To support this goal, appropriate incentives for us- by 2050. It is important to consider consumers’ 
ing and constructing buildings that generate more  interests when dealing with existing buildings 
energy than they need to run on should be re- and avoid asking too much of them. The German 
viewed. To this end, technology-neutral approaches  government will consider to what extent it would 
were developed through the Efficiency House Plus  be possible to introduce incentives to support 
standard, solar house designs or the first pilot pro- those owners wishing to carry out energy-effi-
jects to feed solar thermal energy into heating net- cient refurbishment work at an earlier date, using 
works, which – always in conjunction with highly  the tried and tested CO Building Rehabilitation 
2
efficient thermal insulation – combined the two  Programme, for example, the Market Incentive 
mainstays of the policy: energy efficiency and use  Programme Promoting Renewable Energies 
of renewable energy. Surplus energy from buildings  or the Energy-Efficient Urban Redevelopment 
of this kind can be distributed within networked  programme to promote energy-efficient develop-
neighbourhoods or fed into the heating network or  ment on a neighbourhood scale.
electricity grid so that they have the added bonus of 
compensating for less efficient buildings. →  There are also plans to work with the Länder,  
which are responsible for enforcement of the 
→  By 2050, energy efficiency measures and increased  legislation, to explore options for further 
use of renewable energy should mean that exist- strengthening enforcement.
ing buildings are upgraded to an extent that en-
ables them to comply with the standards required  →  Decarbonisation of buildings, which includes 
of a virtually climate-neutral building stock. The  avoiding as far as possible the use of fossil fuels 
energy requirements to be met by existing build- and resources, means not only saving energy 
ings will therefore be gradually developed in an  but also gradually switching to renewable en-
economically feasible way by 2030. Incentives  ergy sources to provide heating, cooling and 
must be created to ensure that, when heating  electricity. Electricity-based components, such 48 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
as ventilation and air-conditioning systems and  application-focused research in the fields of spatial 
lighting in non-residential buildings, must be  and urban development in order to make examples  
taken into consideration. The German govern- of good practice in problem-solving available to cities 
ment will therefore phase out its funding for  and regions. They include its spatial planning pilot 
replacing heating technology based exclusively  project and experimental housing and urban devel-
on fossil fuels by 2020 and at the same time  opment project (ExWoSt). Among the key questions 
improve funding for renewable heating technol- are the importance that modern information and 
ogies with the aim of making renewable heating  communications technology (ICT) be accorded in the 
systems significantly more attractive than those  future and how use of ICT can be helpful in climate 
using fossil fuels.  action and in networking all relevant sectors. It is also 
important to consider how to ensure the design of 
towns and cities is as flexible as possible in order to be 
Sustainable building 
able to respond to demographic changes, for example. 
Factors such as a pleasant indoor climate, efficient  To deal with questions connected with this in a cross-
room layouts and high-quality, sustainably pro- departmental way, the German government will use, 
duced materials are as important for many people  among other things, the inter-ministerial working 
as the energy performance of buildings. Having  group, which was set up in 2015 on sustainable urban 
said that, environmentally sound, climate-friendly  development from a national and international per-
building materials and modern building design   spective and its subgroups working on implementing 
often fulfil several criteria at the same time. For  the UN Sustainable Development Goals and smart city 
example, renewable insulation materials help to  concepts, for example.
mitigate climate change and at the same time their 
moisture-regulating effect can create a pleasant 
Sector coupling and district heating for 
indoor climate in the home. 
neighbourhoods 
The German government will therefore consider  In the future, it will become increasingly important 
whether and to what extent incentives can be cre- to link up buildings to transport and industry, and to 
ated in the future to: the energy sector. For example, some of the electri-
city generated close to buildings will be increasingly 
→  Strengthen the use of sustainable building and  used to charge electric vehicles, and waste heat from 
insulation materials. Upstream and downstream  nearby industrial installations or heat generated by 
impacts on the climate – such as emissions that  CHP (Combined heat and power) plants, large-scale 
are produced when building materials are manu- heat pumps or solar thermal systems will be used to 
factured, used, disposed of or recovered – are to be  heat neighbourhoods using district or local heating 
taken into account based on freely available life  grids. One thing is already certain: renewable elec-
cycle data. Furthermore, instruments to take the  tricity will play an even greater role in the future, in-
entire life cycle of building materials into account  cluding in buildings. At the same time, developments 
to a greater extent (“cradle to grave” or “cradle  in renewable heat – produced close to buildings or as 
to cradle”) will be reviewed and integrated more  a result of increased use of renewable energy in heat-
closely into building design practice. ing networks – will also gain in importance.
→  Support modular, series-designed buildings and  →  To support the necessary decarbonisation of the 
funding for flexible, multigenerational, fully or  energy supply, the German government will drive 
partially accessible housing to meet the housing  forward research, development and market launch of 
demand more quickly.  inexpensive and innovative technologies that make 
it possible to switch entire systems to low-emission 
heat provision. This includes, for example, low-tem-
Towns, cities and regions of the future
perature systems that are combined with renewable 
Because buildings’ impact on the climate and their  energy sources, concepts for storing energy in a way 
attractiveness are always connected with their phys- that is useful for the system, or methods of produc-
ical surroundings, the German government will fur- ing, distributing and using sustainable fuels based on 
ther step up its activities in the field of practical and  power-to-gas or power-to-liquid technologies.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 49
→  To incentivise greater integration of renewable  in traffic volume. Transport energy consumption in 
energy in buildings, it is crucial to eliminate exist- Germany has more than tripled since 1960. Almost 30 
ing obstacles, for example for housing and prop- percent of the country’s final energy consumption is 
erty businesses, housing associations and building  accounted for by the transport sector and 90 percent of 
owners. The German government will continue to  that is oil based. Germany alone spent some 50 billion 
bear this in mind.  euros on oil imports in 2014.
→  Furthermore, there are plans to enhance and evalu- The picture for GHG emissions is similar. Although 
ate model neighbourhoods, in which new forms of  the steady rise in emissions over decades was halted in 
networking and sector coupling are being tried out,  2000 and levels are now dropping slightly, the trend in 
including smart control of building services, for  CO emissions from transport is nevertheless nowhere 
2
example. near as positive as that in other energy-consuming 
sectors. For example, at 160 million tonnes of CO 
2
equivalent, GHG emissions in 2014 were roughly the 
5.3   Climate action and 
same as in 1990 (when they were 163 million tonnes of 
mobility CO equivalent). This equates to an 18 percent share in 
2
Germany’s total GHG emissions. 
Initial situation
In fact, specific final energy consumption (measured 
Mobility is both a basic human need and an indispens- in passenger and tonne kilometres) has fallen in the 
able necessity in a modern society based on division of  transport sector by about ten percent since 2005. 
labour within a globalised world. It facilitates economic  However, the sharp increase in traffic volume has  
exchange and participation in society, safeguards em- ultimately brought about a slight rise in final energy 
ployment and prosperity, and promotes equal oppor- consumption in absolute terms. For example, passen-
tunities. ger and freight traffic volume has increased fourfold 
since 1960. 
However, mobility in its current form is not sustain-
able. Vehicle efficiency has increased, but all the ef- The individual modes of transport have different 
ficiency gains have been offset by the constant rise  shares in passenger and freight traffic volume. At 
around 76 percent, cars and motorised two-wheelers 
have the largest share of passenger transport. The 
share accounted for by mainline and suburban trains 
is 7.2 percent and public road passenger transport (a 
category which in Germany includes buses, trams and 
underground railways) accounts for 6.5 percent. Avi-
ation’s share in passenger traffic volume is 4.7 percent. 
Bicycle traffic accounts for 2.9 and pedestrian traf-
fic for 2.8 percent. In freight transport, heavy goods 
vehicles are out in front with a 73 percent share of 
transport volume, rail accounts for 17.7 and inland 
waterways 9.3 percent. 
The German Projection Report for 2015/16 indicates 
that given prompt and extremely ambitious imple-
mentation of the climate measures decided to date 
– including those detailed in the Climate Action Pro-
gramme 2020 and the National Action Plan on Energy 
Efficiency – emissions in the transport sector could fall 
to approximately 137 million tonnes of CO equivalent 
2
(such as about 16 percent of 1990 levels) by 2020. 50 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
However, this calls for prompt and far-reaching pro- Guiding principle for 2050 and  
gress in implementation. Furthermore, the estimates  transformation pathway 
of GHG emission trends in the transport sector – es-
pecially up to 2030 – are fraught with uncertainties,  As a modern economy based on division of labour, we 
because factors such as fuel prices, for example, have  depend on reliable, economic, affordable and environ-
a considerable influence on vehicle kilometres and  mentally sound mobility. At the same time, a secure 
therefore on emissions. Current world market prices  energy supply, conservation of resources and climate 
and medium-term expectations for oil prices are sig- change mitigation are also key areas of action for the 
nificantly lower than the values assumed in the Projec- transport sector. 
tion Report.
Transport makes an ambitious contribution to achiev-
In GHG reporting, emissions from international civil  ing national climate targets. The transport system in 
aviation and international maritime shipping are not  Germany will be virtually decarbonised by 2050, such 
accounted for under Germany’s transport sector. The  as will not depend on fossil fuels containing carbon, 
rapid growth in emissions from international aviation  which means it will also be largely greenhouse gas 
and shipping must be addressed. The German govern- neutral. Based on the service life of vehicles, this sets 
ment is advocating vigorously for a reduction in these  the benchmark for the GHG-reduction requirements 
emissions in the relevant UN organisations – ICAO and  for future generations of new vehicles. The guiding 
IMO. In particular, it is supporting the ICAO’s measure  principle also includes a transport system in which 
based on the global market, which will ensure that  noise and air pollutant emissions and land take will be 
growth in aviation from 2020 onwards will be climate  significantly lower than they are today.
neutral. Synergies with existing instruments and the 
UNFCCC process (for example in the case of market- A transport system that emits virtually no greenhouse 
based instruments, reduction targets and reporting  gases guarantees a high degree of mobility for the 
cycles) are to be taken into account. Emissions from  public and ensures the movement of goods needed for 
aviation within the EU are covered by the EU Emissions  economic development. It exploits the potential for 
Trading System. CO emissions from international  modal shifts by providing needs-based infrastructure, 
2
maritime shipping are to be recorded from 2018 on the  a fair intermodal competitive environment and smart 
basis of the MRV Regulation (on monitoring, reporting,  multimodal integration of the different modes of pas-
verification) and the IMO’s data collecting system.  senger and freight transport.
Transport helps to preserve and enhance the quality of 
life in urban centres and rural areas alike – and to  
conserve natural resources. Carefully planned integrated  
urban development reduces the distances between the 
home and key services (for example work, education, 
shopping). A needs-oriented remodelling of the street 
environment and an urban development policy based 
on the model of the compact city, where everything is 
within easy reach, bring about a significant increase in 
walking and cycling as means of transport. Smart  
public transport networks and new mobility services, 
such as car and bike sharing, make key contributions 
to environmentally sound mobility. A decisive role 
is played here by transport and mobility concepts 
that are based on the particular features of the spatial 
structure and infrastructure (urban centres, rural  
areas) and take into account their transport, spatial 
and environmental impacts. CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 51
Automation and networking will change mobility fun- drives and fuels, the use of e-fuels/power-to-X, for 
damentally. The rapid advance of digitisation makes it  example, mean that the internal combustion engine 
possible to increase efficiency. Increasingly automated  remains an indispensable option, which we will keep 
and networked mobility optimises traffic flows, helps  open. In the field of biofuels, the GHG quota creates 
to avoid traffic congestion, reduces the volume of traf- incentives to use fuels with relatively high GHG re-
fic seeing a parking space and thus helps to save energy.  duction values. This promotes a transition towards 
Rush hour traffic is reduced as a result of modern ways  progressive biofuels, especially those based on resi-
of working (home office, mobile working). Travel be- dues and waste that have high GHG reduction values. 
comes smarter, which in turn produces energy savings. 
Logistics processes are further optimised and will re- Biogenic fuels can play a role in applications where it 
duce the number of trips required.  is not possible to use electricity directly, for example 
in aviation. However, the potential of sustainable 
In the target scenario, the energy supply for road and  biomass is limited. It could therefore make sense to 
rail transport, and to some extent for aviation and  convert renewable electricity into hydrogen and pos-
maritime and inland shipping, will be based on bio- sibly in further processes to synthetic methane and 
fuels, provided it is environmentally sound to so, and  synthetic liquid fuels. The hydrogen produced in this 
otherwise as far as possible on electricity from renew- way will be used in fuel cells, the synthetic hydrocar-
able sources and other GHG-neutral vehicle fuels.  bons primarily in ships and aircraft. 
This will make it possible to achieve greenhouse gas 
neutrality even for transport operations that still need  This energy system based on renewable electricity will 
to use motorised modes of transport. The GHG effi- combine the electricity, transport and heat sectors – 
ciency of the individual modes of transport and of the  which are currently still separate sectors – to form an 
transport system as a whole is high, because the pos- efficient overall system, in which the different kinds 
sibilities for technological and logistical optimisation  of energy infrastructure are also coordinated (sector 
will be consistently exploited. Modern, digitally aided  coupling).
transport technologies help to enhance the attract-
iveness of public transport and any other transport  Milestones for 2030
services used by the public. Those modes of transport 
that have the lowest environmental impact are used  The transport sector can and will make a sustain-
most frequently.  able contribution to achieving the climate targets. To 
achieve the interim target for 2030, greenhouse gas 
In terms of motorised road traffic, it will no longer  emissions from transport have to be cut to between 
be possible in the future to meet ambitious fleet tar- 95 and 98 million tonnes of CO equivalent by 2030. 
2
gets for new cars simply by improving the energy  According to the Federal Ministry of Transport and 
efficiency of internal combustion engines. The use of  Digital Infrastructure’s transport interdependence 
lightweight body technology and the integration of  forecast for 2030, the vehicle kilometres for cars will 
alternative drive systems, in particular electric drives,  rise by roughly ten percent between 2010 and 2030 
into series production, combined with further de- – from 599 billion to 657 billion vehicle kilometres 
velopments in this field, is a technical and economic  per annum. For heavy goods vehicle (HGV) traffic, 
challenge for the automobile industry. Germany and  an increase in vehicle kilometres of about 28 per-
the EU are pursuing an active, demand-driven policy  cent during the same period is forecast – from 77.6 
here in order to support this new, forward-looking  billion to 99.7 billion vehicle kilometres per annum. 
technology, including in the field of charging infra- Since HGV and car transport are meant to con-
structure, for example. tribute to achieving the greenhouse gas reduction 
target for 2030, a reduction in their GHG emissions 
Furthermore, we will strengthen the role of technol- per vehicle kilometre is essential. CO targets for the 
2
ogies in the field of electric mobility in Europe. We  new car fleet are set under a European Regulation, 
need battery cell manufacturing capacity in Europe  for which a draft version has been announced for 
that can compete in the global market and will drive  early 2017. The German government is advocating 
forward research and development in battery and  for ambitious development of the targets to ensure 
storage technologies. During the switch to alternative  a reduction in GHG emissions from the transport 52 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
sector to between 95 and 98 million tonnes of CO  infrastructure, will increase transport safety and 
2
equivalent will be achieved by 2030. The required  result in more efficient use of transport infrastruc-
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from road  ture. Digitally connecting trucks (known as pla-
traffic will be achieved through a combination of  tooning) is an example of this. 
increasing vehicle efficiency and stepping up the 
use of GHG-neutral types of energy. Here the indi- According to the transport interdependence fore-
vidual technical options for the different vehicles  cast for 2030, the volume of rail passenger trans-
must be taken into account, along with the eco- port (in passenger kilometres) will rise by 19.2 
nomic impact on the affected stakeholders.  percent between 2010 and 2030, with the volume 
of public road passenger transport (buses, trams, 
The German automobile industry has now de- underground railways) by six percent. Appropriate 
veloped drive technologies for the majority of car  measures such as additional vehicles, adaptations 
segments, which permit an appropriate reduction  in transport infrastructure planning, and further 
in direct GHG emissions from car traffic without  improvements to energy efficiency will significantly 
the need to accept restrictions in the driveability  increase the share accounted for by these modes 
of these vehicles compared with the vehicle fleet to  of transport, which are already relatively climate-
date. They include plug-in hybrid drive and increas- friendly. Digitisation – to make access easier, for 
ingly pure electric vehicles with a greater range, and  example – also makes a key contribution to this. 
fuel cell drive systems. The automobile industry has  The volume of rail freight and inland shipping con-
announced that the price of plug-in hybrid drive  tinues to rise. The Federal Ministry of Transport and 
vehicles will be roughly the same as diesel vehicles  Digital Infrastructure’s transport interdependence 
from 2020. The German government is aiming to  forecast puts the increase in rail freight transport 
achieve a significant reduction in emissions from  at 43 percent and in inland shipping at 23 percent 
cars by 2030. The electrification of the new car fleet  between 2010 and 2030. In particular for rail freight 
will make a decisive contribution to this and should  transport, targeted investments in the rail network 
be given priority. The majority of drive technologies  (including rail electrification) are being made and 
developed for cars and existing lightweight body  an appropriate framework created to ensure that 
technologies can also be used for light commercial  the conditions needed to shift transport from road 
vehicles, which account for about 62 percent of  to rail are in place, and that at least the forecast 
commercial vehicle miles, so that these vehicles too  transport volume can actually be achieved. Equally 
will be able to achieve the required reduction in  essential for successfully bringing about a modal 
GHG emissions per vehicle kilometre. The reduced  shift is effectively improving the intermodal com-
weight resulting from the lightweight design tech- petitive conditions so that they favour climate-
nologies can be used both to increase the vehicle’s  friendly rail transport. 
payload and to extend the range of electric vehicles. 
The potential of cycling as a means of transport 
There is still potential for reducing GHG emissions  – both for short and long distances – should be 
per vehicle kilometre from heavy goods vehicles of  fully harnessed, to enable its share in overall traffic 
around 30 percent by 2030 as a result of further ef- volume to exceed that indicated in the transport 
ficiency increases for combustion engines and trans- interdependence forecast (2.6 percent in 2030). This 
missions, hybridisation, better aerodynamics, the use  can be achieved by creating attractive cycle infra-
of optimised rolling resistance tyres, modifications  structure in towns and cities and their surrounding 
to vehicle length and the use of hydrogen, lique- areas and, more particularly, by introducing better 
fied natural gas (LNG) and renewable methane in  connections to public transport. This could make it 
optimised gas engines. Here, too, the other emission  possible for more and more trips within cities or in 
reductions required can be achieved by using electric  the surrounding regions to be made by bicycle or 
drives. These are currently already being trialled in  pedelec. 
heavy goods vehicles for regional delivery services.
More widespread use of cargo bikes also offers po-
The potential of digitisation, especially new devel- tential for reducing greenhouse gases. They can be 
opments in the field of real-time data communi- used both for express parcel courier services and for 
cation between vehicles, or between vehicles and  other small-scale transport services. The volume of CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 53
redesigned without impacting on revenue, so that 
transport behaviour that causes as little greenhouse 
gas production as possible also delivers financial 
benefits for individuals and businesses.
Measures
A great deal of work has been done in recent years on 
the basic technology needed to make mobility virtu-
ally greenhouse gas neutral, especially for road-based 
means of transport. Thus, over the next few years, a 
large number of car models will be launched on the 
market with electric, plug-in hybrid or hydrogen-
fuel-cell drive systems. The German government 
has to date put over 2.6 billion euros of funding into 
research and development in this field. The German 
automobile industry has for its part invested more 
than 15 billion euros in the development of electric 
mobility. 
The German government has also provided appropri-
ate financial support and achieved a great deal in the 
field of electricity-based vehicle fuels. For example, 
a number of demonstration facilities for producing 
freight transport can also be reduced by enhancing  hydrogen by electrolysis and producing synthetic 
local production and consumption structures.  methane were set up and their operation is now being 
carefully analysed. An initial pilot plant to produce 
Attractive streets can be inviting places that en- electricity-based liquid fuels (power-to-liquid) also 
courage people to walk more. This can also cut  went into operation in 2014. One of the next neces-
emissions, especially if all facilities are within easy  sary steps is to achieve cost parity with biofuels, which 
reach. Climate-friendly transport options will be  depends above all on intensifying research into ma-
included in planning considerations.  terials and surface engineering aspects of electrolysis. 
The first steps to increase the use of methane in mari-
Attempts are also being made to achieve emission  time and inland shipping have also been taken. 
reductions in aviation and maritime transport 
through alternative drive technologies and design  The German government will continue in the future 
modifications. Since both sectors will continue to  to make a significant contribution to developing 
rely on liquid fuels for the foreseeable future, op- public transport by providing considerable financial 
tions for blending biogenic fuels and those based  resources. 
on renewable electricity are being considered. The 
gradual replacement of fossil electricity generation  The German government is supporting cycling as a 
by renewables is a crucial criterion that must be  means of transport with no or low-cost measures, 
met if these vehicle fuels are to achieve a good cli- some of them as part of its implementation of the 
mate footprint. Biobased vehicle fuels are also being  National Cycle Paths Plan.
considered, provided it can be guaranteed that they 
have been sustainably produced. With its Mobility and Fuels Strategy adopted in 2013, 
the German government provided an initial overview 
To promote the use of low-greenhouse gas or  of the technologies used and the energy and fuel op-
greenhouse gas-neutral modes of transport (non- tions associated with the different modes of transport. 
motorised road traffic or motorised road traffic  It is seen as a “learning strategy” and identifies ways 
based on renewable energy) the question of how  of implementing the Energiewende in the transport 
levies and surcharges on transport can be gradually  sector in the long term. 54 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
The German government’s continuing support for  Action Plan make a significant contribution to devel-
the National Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Technology In- oping these concepts. 
novation Programme makes a further contribution to 
driving forward the innovation process needed for the  The next step that needs to be taken now to work 
Energiewende. towards the 2030 GHG reduction target is to iden-
tify conditions that are conducive to the launch and 
Achieving the climate and energy targets the German  market penetration of the necessary drive technol-
government has set depends on rapidly establishing  ogies and fuels. This includes questions such as the 
an effective charging and fuelling infrastructure for  latest date by which they should be brought onto 
alternative fuels. The government has drafted a na- the market and what degree of market penetration 
tional strategy framework to implement the EU directi- they should have reached by what point in time. Fur-
ve on this subject. It includes equipping motorway  thermore, the question of how to further increase 
service stations with rapid charging points by 2017.  the share of already low-emission or zero-emission 
The government will roll out a funding programme  modes of transport must also be considered. 
worth 300 million euros from 2017 to 2020 for  
the further expansion of a needs-based charging   The German government will address any still unre-
infrastructure network.  solved questions on sector coupling and technologies 
such as alternative drives within its research pro-
As part of its work to continue developing its Mobil- grammes.
ity and Fuels Strategy without restricting it to any 
particular technology, the government is also con-
A concept for climate policy in the road 
sidering fast-tracking the introduction of alternative 
transport sector
drive systems and vehicle fuels. An initiative target-
ing heavy goods vehicles is one option. Hydrogen is  In order to implement the milestones outlined above, 
an alternative fuel that can be used both in fuel cells  the German government intends to present a concept 
and internal combustion engines. The possibility of  for reducing GHG emissions from road transport by 
storing it in liquid organic hydrogen carriers (LOHC)  2030. This concept will take into consideration:
could make this easier in the future. LNG in conjunc-
tion with new optimised gas engines can also help  →  the communication published by the EU Commis-
to reduce emissions. In the medium term, the use of  sion in July 2016 entitled “A European Strategy for 
synthetic vehicle fuels based on renewable energy will  Low-Emission Mobility;
also bring about GHG reductions. The government 
sees natural gas as playing a key role in the transition  →  the proposal for an Effort Sharing Regulation pre-
to mainly electricity-based mobility and in reducing  sented by the EU Commission in July 2016;
emissions of greenhouse gases and other pollutants. 
→  the proposal announced by the EU Commission for 
To continue to consolidate Germany’s role as a pi- a post-2020 target for CO emissions from cars and 
2
oneer in the field of automated and networked mobil- light commercial vehicles;
ity, the government supports applications-oriented 
research and development projects, such as the  →  current plans by the EU Commission for reducing 
world’s first fully digitised test field on the A9 motor- CO emissions from heavy goods vehicles;
2
way. 
→  progress in achieving a GHG-free energy supply 
The German government will develop concepts with- and in the infrastructure needed to deliver it in the 
out delay to ensure the 2030 milestone and ultimately  transport sector;
the overall target of virtually greenhouse gas-neutral 
transport by 2050 are met. The measures proposed  →  the availability of the relevant energy and potential 
during the participation process for the Climate  in sector coupling.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 55
Funding electric mobility The government’s existing funding programmes de-
signed to shift transport from the road to the railways 
Due to the central importance of electric mobility in  or inland waterways will be strengthened. 
reducing GHG emissions from motorised road traffic, 
the German government will review its funding meas- To sustainably boost investments in climate-friendly 
ures at regular intervals and adapt them to develop- local public transport, funds from the federal pro-
ments. gramme provided for in the Community Transport 
Financing Act will be continued on a permanent basis. 
New technological developments in bus and rail trans-
Financial incentives
port and further integration of transport services will 
To meet the targets set in the Climate Action Plan  continue to be funded. 
2050, it will be necessary to consider all the options for 
revenue-neutral modification of levies and surcharges 
Rail transport
in the transport sector, with the aim of creating clear 
financial incentives to choose environmentally friendly  The German government is developing a concept for 
modes of transport and vehicles and to use electricity  rail transport 2030/2050 to ensure that the potential 
from renewable energy sources in the transport sector. for shifting road traffic onto the railways is fully ex-
ploited. In this context, the possibility of introducing 
network-wide coordination of connections between 
Modal split
mainline and local rail passenger transport will be 
The German government will present a concept for  considered. The extent to which accelerating work to 
how the shares accounted for by public transport, rail  upgrade infrastructure can shift freight transport onto 
freight transport and inland shipping can be increased  the railways is also being explored (including control 
above the level indicated in the transport forecast  command and signalling technology and combined 
for 2030. In this connection, target corridors for their  transport terminals).
shares in the modal split that are in line with the long-
term climate target for transport are to be developed. It 
Cycling and walking
is important here to take into account the networking 
of all modes of transport within an efficient overall  The German government intends to continue to up-
system, in which each mode of transport inputs its  date the National Cycle Paths Plan (NRVP) beyond 
particular strengths.  2020 and in this context support local authorities by 
creating an appropriate regulatory framework and 
financial funding for specific activities to boost cycling 
as a means of transport. Within the possibilities pro-
vided for by the law, government and non-government 
actors involved in promoting cycling as a means of 
transport will receive continued support, for example 
by implementing integrated model projects to trial in-
novative measures. The government intends to become 
even more closely involved in building cycle express-
ways within the framework of opportunities provided 
for under constitutional law. As part of the work to 
update the National Cycle Paths Plan, specific goals on 
developing cycling as a means of transport that are in 
line with the medium and long-term climate target in 
the transport sector will be formulated. The German 
government is also working towards promoting walk-
ing as a means of transport.56 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
Air and maritime transport  5.4   Climate action in industry 
The German government will address the current re- and business
search need and – depending on the outcome of the 
research – will present a concept for expanding the use 
Initial situation
of electricity-based fuels in national and international 
air and maritime transport and launching them on the  The industry sector includes all emissions from com-
market. The role of waste and residue-based biofuels  bustion processes and generation of its own power by 
should also be explored in this context. the manufacturing industry, as well as emissions from 
industrial processes and the use of fluorinated gases in 
products (direct emissions). This section also addresses 
Digitisation strategy for the transport sector 
emissions from the trade, commerce and services sec-
The German government is advocating for a clear  tor with measures that are not related to heat supply 
regulatory framework at national, European and inter- to buildings. Based on the source principle, emissions 
national level and is driving forward the development  caused by electricity purchased from external suppliers 
of common standards. In view of the digitisation of all  are included in the energy sector (Section 5.1). Measures 
areas of life, the government intends to develop a digit- relating to the industry and business area of action can 
isation strategy for the transport sector, which includes  therefore reduce emissions in the energy sector as well as 
exploiting the potential for reducing greenhouse gases  in industry sector and in trade, commerce and services. 
as far as possible. It will explore how this can take place 
in connection with work to make its digital agenda  The industry sector was the second-largest source of 
more specific. In addition to this, standards for smart  greenhouse gas emissions in Germany in 2014. It was re-
roads are to be trialled and conclusions drawn about  sponsible for 181 million tonnes of CO equivalent, some 
2
how road infrastructure can be designed in a way that  20 percent of all greenhouse gas emissions in Germany. 
is pioneering and ensures it is fit for purpose. This sector purchases large amounts of electricity, so it is 
also an important area of action for reducing emissions 
from the energy sector. Direct emissions by this sector 
have fallen 36 percent since 1990. At the European level, 
some 60 percent of those emissions are covered by the 
Emissions Trading System and around 40 percent by the CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 57
The greatest challenge for the industry sector is to 
make a contribution to cutting CO emissions which 
2
takes full advantage of its reduction potential.  
Guiding principle for 2050 and  
transformation pathway
The goal of greenhouse gas neutrality will require 
fundamental changes over the long term. Climate 
action drives efficiency and innovation and it must 
therefore be maintained – in addition to Industry 4.0, 
Germany’s drive to digitise industry – as an essential 
component of a modernisation strategy whose goal 
is to achieve economic success and maintain the 
international competitiveness of industrial produc-
tion and the manufacturing industry in Germany, 
especially under the conditions imposed by an ambi-
tious climate policy. The German economy is highly 
innovative and strong in the area of research and 
development, not just at the level of large companies, 
but also in small and medium-sized enterprises. Re-
Effort Sharing Decision. Process-related emissions by  search in universities, applied and industrial research, 
industry have fallen by almost 27 percent since 1990.  and innovative companies are strongly networked. 
Germany also has good infrastructure, a high level 
The development of waste management into a circular  of education and a stable labour market. Those fac-
economy has also made a considerable contribution  tors give it a competitive advantage as a place to do 
to climate action by Germany’s industry. Around 20  business, enabling it to put the corresponding tech-
percent of the reductions of greenhouse gas emissions  nologies to work in real applications and allowing its 
from 1990 to 2012 which were agreed to under the  economy to benefit from the transformation. With 
Kyoto Protocol are the result of waste management  our strategy for modernising our national economy, 
measures (particularly the decision to end landfilling of  the right enabling policy environment and active 
biodegradable waste and expand recycling). regional and structural policies to support structural 
change, we intend to create reliable conditions for the 
A significant percentage (about 38 percent) of industrial  German economy which will allow a prompt adjust-
emissions do not result from energy use but are instead  ment to this transformation process and make it pos-
directly attributable to production processes in the  sible to take advantage of the opportunities it offers. 
raw materials industry, for example, the production of  More stringent climate requirements are a challenge 
lime and cement, steel and basic chemicals. This sector  for businesses. However, climate action can also be a 
is particularly challenging in terms of reducing emis- driver of innovation for a modern high-tech country 
sions, and there are generally various options avail- like Germany. Production and demand are inextric-
able. For example, these processes can be replaced by  ably linked in the economic process, so the influence 
new technologies and methods in the industry or CO  of demand and sustainable consumption on the trend 
2
emissions can be reduced using carbon capture and  for greenhouse gas emissions must also be taken into 
utilisation (CCU). If emissions are unavoidable, it may  account in the transformation process. It will be cru-
be necessary to lower them through long-term carbon  cial to increase the awareness of all stakeholders and 
capture and storage (CCS). empower them to take action and having the neces-
sary knowledge and data base will be indispensable. 
Information on the historical and predicted emission  The UN Sustainable Development Goal of ensuring 
trend for the trade, commerce and services sector can  sustainable consumption and production patterns 
be found in the chapter on buildings.  (SDG 12) offers guidance for this.58 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
An important element in this modernisation pathway  recycling should receive stronger political support at 
is a high-efficiency strategy for reducing the amount  the European and international levels, such as greater 
of resources and energy needed for production, in- efforts to tackle illegal waste exports and binding  
cluding continuous research and development to tap  European standards for final consumer products.
additional potential. This means that the technologic-
al and organisational factors of success and areas of  Milestones for 2030
action such as corporate environmental management 
must be taken into account. More intelligent linking  In line with the interim target for 2030, greenhouse 
of production and economic processes as digitisation  gas emissions by industry must be reduced to between 
progresses and Industry 4.0 can contribute to more  140 and 143 million tonnes of CO equivalent by 2030. 
2
efficient use of resources. Emission-intensive raw  This means that industry and the trade, commerce and 
materials should be used more efficiently along the  services sector will have to increase their efficiency by 
entire value chain, combining material flows across  2030. At the same time, it will be necessary to combine 
industries can increase energy and resource efficiency  the material and energy efficiency of industry and 
and innovations in materials science can help to find  business to a greater extent. Efforts to avoid rejects and 
substitutes for emission-intensive materials. Reducing  adopt circular economy practices in production must 
industry’s need for useful energy by taking advantage  be stepped up as far as possible by 2030. 
of innovative process methods and technologies – 
such as preventing or reusing waste heat offers great  This will mean developing a long-term strategic ap-
potential. proach before 2020, based on the National Action Plan 
on Energy Efficiency, implementing it after 2020 and 
Another key element is replacing fossil fuels with  effectively optimising it by 2030. This will establish 
CO-free or CO-neutral fuels. This includes renewable  clear, reliable background conditions for the affected 
2 2
energy options (electricity, biomass, and hydrogen  companies and provide a sound basis for planning.  
from power-to-X) and a circular economy for CO  The focus will be on cross-cutting technologies and 
2
(CCU; see Section 5.1).  production technologies, with particular attention  
being paid to the reduction and reuse of waste heat at 
Waste already replaces a high percentage of primary  all temperature levels. The many barriers to taking ad-
raw materials in Germany. Energy-saving recovery   vantage of the economic potential offered by efficiency 
of these secondary raw materials and the replace- must be strategically addressed, and helpful factors 
ment of primary raw materials reduce greenhouse   must be identified and likewise addressed. 
gas emissions to a considerable extent. There is still  
major potential for climate action in this area. Tech- Production facilities in industry, particularly the emis-
nological development is also making an important  sion-intensive raw materials industry, generally have a 
contribution. Dynamic innovation and innovative  very long useful life lasting several decades, sometimes 
progress should not be inadvertently restricted. For   more than 50 years. That is why early action is neces-
example, the resource biowaste must be put to greater  sary to avoid destruction of value. Any retrofits to pro-
cascade use as a material and to produce energy (SDG 2).  duction facilities or commissioning of new production 
To take advantage of the potential offered by the   facilities must be based on the best available technol-
circular economy between now and 2050, it will be  ogy with regard to their specific effect on climate. 
essential to recover secondary raw materials of this 
kind from waste, because they emit fewer greenhouse  Achieving the necessary reductions in process emis-
gases than using primary raw materials does (that is  sions by industry will require defining further steps in 
the case for metals such as secondary aluminium, for  implementation no later than the 2020 – 2030 period. 
example). The water supply and wastewater manage- Specific measures for implementing those solutions 
ment sectors also offer obvious potential that must  must be in place by 2030. This will require immedi-
be systematically used, for example by putting ef- ate major research and development work targeted to 
ficiency measures in place or using sewage gas, which  specific process innovations and to CCU, which builds 
simultaneously prevents methane gas emissions, and  on current activities; a potential role for CCS in this 
other renewable energy sources when treating waste- context must then be examined if that turns out to be 
water. Secondary raw material recovery in the form of  necessary and acceptable.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 59
The German government aims at a continuous im- Measures 
provement in resource efficiency; indicators and 
measures for this are specified in the German Resource  Several measures are already having an effect in the 
Efficiency Programme (currently ProgRess II), which  industry and business area of action. European emis-
is regularly updated. The government is endeavour- sions trading should be mentioned at this juncture; it 
ing in particular to continue the 2000 – 2010 trend for  is already implementing the EU targets for 2020 and 
total raw material productivity up to 2030. This indica- will implement those for 2030 in the sectors it covers. 
tor includes both abiotic and biotic raw materials and  The German government is working to obtain further 
includes imported goods along with all raw material  reforms to strengthen emissions trading. A series of 
quantities used during the production process. measures will increase efforts to take advantage of the 
potential for improving efficiency, such as mandatory 
The EU Emissions Trading System will continue to  instruments (audit required by the Energy Services 
be an essential instrument for climate action in the  Act) and instruments based on financial incentives to 
industry sector. It is particularly important to ensure  promote the introduction of energy and environmen-
that a reliable framework is in place to give affected  tal management systems, along with support for cap-
companies a solid basis for planning over the medium  ital investments. An instrument mix to increase the 
and long term. Market mechanisms that use a cap to  dissemination of energy-efficient products has been 
send a pricing signal based on scarcity, thereby pro- established which includes both mandatory elements 
viding reasonable incentives to reduce emissions and  (Ecodesign Directive) and voluntary elements (product 
make investments, play a decisive role. Emissions trad- labelling such as the Blue Angel and the EU eco-label). 
ing must be designed in such a way that emissions are  Emissions of fluorinated greenhouse gases (known as 
reduced all over Europe in order to meet the target.  Fluorinated greenhouse gases [F-gases]) are addressed 
That is why the German government advocates sus- in the EU FGas Regulation (Number 517/2014). The 
tainably strengthening the emissions trading system. In  Act on the Prevention of Harmful Effects on the En-
the government’s view, it is essential for the most ef- vironment Caused by Air Pollution, Noise, Vibration 
ficient and climate-friendly technologies to be used as a  and Similar Phenomena requires facilities subject to 
benchmark. The top ten percent of plants in that regard  permitting to be built and operated in a way that uses 
must be granted an exemption from further require- energy economically and efficiently. Measures to in-
ments to reduce CO. There must also be reasonable  crease resource efficiency are also making a decisive 
2
rules on what is known as “direct and indirect carbon  contribution to climate change mitigation. They are 
leakage” to prevent any shifting of CO emissions to 
2
countries outside of Europe. 
The transition to greenhouse gas neutrality will require 
the economy to be sustainable in all senses, including 
for example socially responsible action along the sup-
ply chain and transparent reporting on sustainability 
by companies. The Elmau declaration expressly refers 
to the role of the governments and economies of all 
G7 states in ensuring responsible supply chains; the 
obligation to report on sustainability was clarified in 
the EU in 2014. Finally, the opportunities and risks of 
climate change are now an integral part of manage-
ment systems, for example the revised environmental 
management standard DIN EN ISO 14001:2015.
A reliable enabling environment is a prerequisite for a 
socially and economically plannable – and profitable – 
transition to a climate-neutral economy. That environ-
ment must therefore be established as soon as possible. 
The measures described below are designed to do that.60 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
grouped together in the German Resource Efficiency  option of a circular carbon economy for industry (using 
Programme (currently ProgRess II). CCU, for example). The Federal Ministry of Education 
and Research (BMBF) is funding innovative R&D pro-
Extending the useful lives of products and  jects in the area of CO use (CCU) as part of the COPlus 
2 2
– Material use of CO to broaden the raw materials base 
avoiding waste  2
programme. The BMBF funding programme entitled 
Using products for a long time generally offers consid- r+Impuls – innovative technologies for resource ef-
erable advantages in terms of environmental protec- ficiency – impetus for industrial resource efficiency to 
tion and climate action and at the same time conserves  promote resource efficiency is also providing support 
natural resources. The right balance must be struck  that will help get implementation-oriented, indus-
between resource conservation resulting from suf- trially-driven CCU projects on their way to market. 
ficiently long useful lives and resource conservation  To determine what shape the research and develop-
resulting from leaps in innovation, keeping in mind  ment programme will take, the German government 
the “rebound effect.” Ever-shorter consumption cycles  will soon begin an industry-specific dialogue process 
can be seen in some product groups (such as electrical  with the affected industries. Support for launching 
appliances and electronics equipment). The aim of this  mature technologies on the market will build on that. 
measure is therefore to extend the useful lives of the  The BMUB’s Environmental Innovation Programme 
relevant product groups, for example in the context of  is already funding demonstration projects that imple-
the EU Ecodesign Directive.  ment technology to lessen environmental impact on 
an industrial scale for the first time. In this way, the 
→  Important starting points include making improve- programme is helping to bring advanced technologies 
ments to the enabling environment to encourage  of this kind to market. 
repair of products and ensuring the greatest pos-
sible transparency at the point of sale about how  Consistent, strategic effort to take advantage 
long products will last. The German government 
of the potential offered by industrial and com-
will review measures and specific instruments for 
mercial waste heat
implementation of this.
At this time almost 70 percent of industry’s final 
→  At the European level, the German government also  energy demand is for fuel. This means that large 
supports the identification of measures to provide  amounts of heat and therefore waste heat are pro-
information on the availability of spare parts and  duced. That waste heat should be consistently and 
repair guides, particularly for independent work- strategically used for both industry and homes. All 
shops. options are being considered, including power gen-
eration and use in local heating systems and district 
→  However, the best option is the overall avoidance  heating networks. This will take into account exist-
of waste, because this prevents climate-damaging  ing programmes and measures. All economic and 
emissions that would otherwise be generated dur- non-economic barriers are being addressed with 
ing production and disposal. The German govern- an appropriate mix of instruments. Research and 
ment will update its Waste Prevention Programme  development of new options for using waste heat, 
in 2019. such as power generation from waste heat, will 
receive support, and the possibilities for avoiding 
Research, development and market intro- waste heat are also receiving more attention. The 
aforementioned points will be defined as part of a 
duction programme to reduce industrial  
strategy to be implemented as soon as possible. 
process emissions 
The German government will work with industry  Continuous optimisation of the knowledge 
to develop a research and development programme 
base concerning high-efficiency technol-
oriented to reducing industrial process emissions 
ogies in and for companies
that affect climate. It is tailored to specific sectors and 
oriented to the goal of bringing about a transition to  Knowledge about high-efficiency technologies in 
greenhouse gas neutrality. This will also include the  the area of energy use by industry and business is CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 61
expanding. However, such knowledge must also be  requirements and formats, thereby helping to avoid 
continuously made available to companies so they  risks and costs. The German government will further 
can put it to good use. This relates to both company  strengthen uniform climate reporting based on exist-
employees and outside service providers such as con- ing reporting instruments, thereby ensuring the use of 
sultants and installation and maintenance companies.  uniform reporting standards. It will provide advice and 
The German government will therefore work with  support for implementation by small and medium-
stakeholders in the field of vocational and university  sized enterprises.
training and continuing professional development, 
as well as the relevant associations and institutions, 
Technological transformation in industry
to develop long-lasting mechanisms to accelerate the 
dissemination and use of new technical knowledge by  Germany must continue to be an attractive location for 
2020 at the latest. One area of emphasis will be train- industry, including the manufacturing industry. To test 
ing for employees of small and medium-sized enter- and demonstrate the feasibility of the modernisation 
prises. pathway at an early stage based on practical examples, 
the German government will increasingly focus the use 
of National Climate Initiative (NKI) funds on enabling 
Climate reporting by companies
particularly energy-intensive sectors and companies to 
Thanks to international and European initiatives like  introduce new technologies that are available on the 
the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), comprehensive  market and new business models to reduce produc-
systems for voluntary climate reporting by companies  tion’s resource and energy demand and strengthen the 
already exist. Systematic climate reporting ensures  circular economy. To accelerate the dissemination of 
transparency with regard to a company’s emissions,  best practices, these measures will be backed by public 
strategic orientations and future investments, and can  relations work aimed at specific target groups, and it 
be an important source of information for decisions  will be determined whether funding for this work is 
by investors, consumers and companies themselves. It  necessary.
will require little effort to build on existing reporting 62 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
5.5   Climate action in 
equivalent) and greenhouse gas emissions from the 
agriculture use of fuel in agricultural machinery and vehicles 
(six million tonnes of CO equivalent). Emissions from 
2
agriculture in 2014 were about 18 percent below the 
Initial situation
1990 level. The substantial declines from 1990 to 1994 
Agriculture is particularly affected by climate change,  were primarily due to the reduction in livestock farm-
but it also emits greenhouse gases. At the same time,  ing following structural changes in the former East 
it can make an important contribution to climate  Germany. Additional reductions come from improve-
change mitigation by sustainably producing biogenic  ments in fertiliser management, for example.
raw materials. The primary task of agriculture is to 
produce food on a sustainable basis. In addition to  Most agricultural greenhouse gas emissions are 
adapting agriculture to climate change, it is also the  caused by natural physiological processes, so the abil-
goal of the German government to take full advan- ity of technical measures to reduce them is limited.
tage of its potential to contribute to climate change 
mitigation. Agriculture protects the natural resources  Guiding principle for 2050 and  
that sustain life and also performs other tasks. The 
transformation pathway
government funds research and development projects 
that will tap further potential for adapting to climate  Ensuring a reliable food supply, protecting the climate, 
change and reducing greenhouse gas emissions in  supplying renewable raw materials and conserving 
agriculture. the natural resources that sustain life are among the 
important tasks performed by agriculture. The German 
Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture were  government is therefore doing its utmost to ensure 
72 million tonnes of CO equivalent in 2014, which  that those tasks go hand in hand as far as possible and 
2
equates to eight percent of all greenhouse gas emis- that conflicting goals do not arise. A reduction to zero 
sions in Germany. The largest source is emissions of  emissions as in other sectors will be impossible due to 
nitrous oxide due to the use of nitrogen in fertiliser  the biological processes involved in crop cultivation 
(25 million tonnes of CO equivalent), methane emis- and livestock farming. The emphasis of climate action 
2
sions from the digestive processes of ruminants  efforts in agriculture up to 2050 will be on measures to 
(25 million tonnes of CO equivalent), emissions  reduce emissions and increase resource efficiency as 
2
from slurry management (10 million tonnes of CO  part of sustainable agricultural production.
2CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 63
Bioeconomy Strategy – uses fewer fossil fuels or phases 
them out entirely. A sustainable bioeconomy contrib-
utes to achieving climate targets as well as various Sus-
tainable Development Goals under Agenda 2030. 
Due to the biological processes involved in crop cultiva-
tion, it will be impossible to reduce emissions from the 
production of agricultural biomass to zero. The energy 
supply must be almost entirely decarbonised by 2050 at 
the latest but, because land is needed to grow food, agri-
cultural biofuel’s contribution to climate change mitiga-
tion will be limited. By contrast, the use of bioenergy 
from residues and waste materials will make a major 
contribution to supplying energy to multiple sectors, so 
full advantage must be taken of the available potential 
over the long run. No increase in the amount of land 
used to grow renewable raw materials beyond current 
levels is anticipated, even during a transition period, due 
to restrictions on land use and sustainability consider-
ations. For example, the fermentation of plant biomass 
by the biogas industry has been responsible for rising 
ammonia emissions in Germany over the past few years. 
Agriculture cannot completely avoid its greenhouse gas  Because of the problem of agricultural biomass com-
emissions over the long term, either. But it must also  peting with other land uses, this transformation path-
make further reductions from the 2030 interim target  way also supports the UN Sustainable Development 
by 2050, remembering that sufficient emission allow- Goals in the areas of food (SDG 2) and biodiversity 
ances need to be available especially for non-avoidable  (SDG 15). 
emissions from industrial processes. This target also 
involves a series of challenges – including maintaining  Cascade use and combined use must be the objective 
the level of agricultural production for a growing world  whenever possible. Compliance with the Ordinance 
population – in view of the UN Sustainable Develop- on Small and Medium-Sized Firing Installations will 
ment Goal of ending hunger, achieving food security  be required to minimise particulate pollution from the 
and improved nutrition and promoting sustainable  use of wood and straw.
agriculture (SDG 2). It will require intensive research in 
many areas and research activities must be stepped up  Milestones for 2030
both at national and international levels.
According to the intermediate target for 2030, green-
One important pathway for achieving the climate ac- house gas emissions from agriculture must be reduced 
tion target is to cut nitrogen surpluses in the short  to 58 to 61 million tonnes of CO equivalent by 2030.
2
term and reduce levels permanently over the long 
term. Among other things, this will mean a substantial  To cut emissions of reactive nitrogen in agriculture, 
reduction in ammonia emissions from agriculture. The  there will have to be a considerable reduction in sur-
reduction requirements set out in the NEC Directive  plus nitrogen as part of efforts to make fertiliser use 
(EU National Emission Ceilings Directive) must be ful- more efficient. The nitrogen surplus in the gross nu-
filled as soon as possible, and further reductions will be  trient balance is to be reduced to 70 kilogram of nit-
needed if the goals of the NERC Directive, which speci- rogen per hectare (kg N/ha) between 2028 and 2032, 
fies the national emission reduction commitments for  with a further clear reduction by 2050. An integrated 
the period up to 2030, are to be achieved. nitrogen report by the German government in 2017 
will contain a presentation of nitrogen emissions 
For the sake of climate action, progress must be made  from the various sectors and describe approaches  
in changing into a sustainable economy that is more  to tackling the need to reduce reactive nitrogen 
biobased and – in accordance with the National  emissions. Ammonia emissions from agriculture 64 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
must also be substantially reduced. It will be neces- Protection Act will include enhanced measures to 
sary to comply with the reduction obligations of the  promote environmentally sound land and forest 
NEC Directive in a timely fashion. Additional reduc- management that is appropriate for the market and 
tions will be needed if the NERC Directive, which  location, including contractual nature and landscape 
specifies the national emission reduction commit- conservation. They contribute to climate change miti-
ments up to 2030, is to be transposed. For example,  gation in the form of direct climate measures as well 
reduction measures that relate to management prac- as indirectly through environmental protection and 
tices and technology will be necessary. nature conservation measures, and also contribute to 
landscape management.
Additional synergies between air quality and climate 
action result from the fact that lower methane emis- The German government is reviewing the possibility, 
sions help to reduce ozone pollution over large areas.  which is allowed under current EU law, of reallocating 
funds from the first to the second pillar (promoting 
Twenty percent of land used for agricultural should  rural development) of the CAP.
be organically farmed, up from 6.3 percent in 2014. 
The steadily rising demand for organic produce is 
Further reduction of nitrogen surpluses
another reason for expanding organic farming.
The German government will work with the Länder 
The next reform of the EU Common Agricultural  to ensure full implementation and consistent en-
Policy (CAP) will be the subject of discussions in the  forcement of legislation on fertiliser, particularly the 
period up to 2020. The structure of the CAP and the  Fertiliser Application Ordinance and the planned 
way it is transposed into national legislation will  ordinance on good nutrient management practice 
considerably influence the intensity of agricultural  on farms, thereby ensuring that the German Sustain-
practices and the resulting greenhouse gas emis- able Development Strategy’s target of 70 kg N/ha 
sions. The EU Commission introduced the “greening”  between 2028 and 2032 is achieved. Targeted funding 
of direct payments as part of the CAP reform in 2013  programmes under the CAP and the Joint Task for the 
in an effort to make EU agricultural policy more  Improvement of Agricultural Structures and Coastal 
environmentally friendly. It looks as if the CAP is set  Protection are intended to support farmers in im-
to make an even greater contribution to climate ac- plementing their adaptation strategies. The German 
tion targets, which means that any elements it may  government will promote targeted research and fur-
include in future would have to be reviewed in light  ther development into nitrogen reduction measures. 
of their effectiveness for climate change mitigation.  Research and development will be needed to further 
The requirement for climate-friendly production  improve nitrogen utilisation and to encourage in-
methods should be oriented to the principle of “pub- novative new measures for avoiding ammonia emis-
lic funds for the public good.” sions. The focus should be on innovative approaches 
to managing farm manure and improving the utilisa-
Measures tion of nitrogen from organic fertilisers in order to 
reduce nitrous oxide emissions. Other measures are 
Support under the Common Agricultural  intended to improve the efficiency of nitrogen in live-
Policy stock feed. 
One way of reducing greenhouse gas emissions from  Increasing the percentage of land used for 
agriculture is to use financing instruments under the 
organic farming
Common Agricultural Policy. The German govern-
ment is constantly doing its utmost during negoti- Organic farming, along with conventional farming, is 
ations – and will continue to do so between now and  an important pillar of Germany’s agriculture and agri-
2020 – to ensure that funding policies are oriented to  food sector. Based on its principles (such as circular 
the EU’s decisions on climate policy.  economy, appropriate stocking density and particu-
larly animal welfare), the conversion to organic agri-
The current amendment of the Joint Task for the  culture offers a promising outlook for future develop-
Improvement of Agricultural Structures and Coastal  ment, particularly for small and medium-sized family CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050K /L CIMABAISNCEHTU RTEZSPOLLAUNT 2I0O5N0 65
farms. Organic farming practices are oriented to the  support from the national level. These include meas-
principle of sustainability and contribute to the public  ures by the Länder to strengthen local organic farm-
good, particularly in the areas of environmental pro- ing and action programmes or model regions for 
tection, climate change mitigation and resource con- organic farming. 
versation. It is therefore a stated goal of the German 
government that 20 percent of the total land used for  The food-related proposals and measures in the Na-
agriculture be organically farmed.  tional Programme for Sustainable Consumption are 
also appropriate for promoting organic farming. The 
In a participatory process involving the organic agri- German government will therefore do its utmost to en-
food sector – with the participation of the Länder,  sure that an ambitious effort is made to implement the 
scientists and associations – a strategy for the future  programme. The goal is far from being reached, so the 
of organic farming will be developed to ensure that  government will also look into what other measures it 
the goal of using 20 percent of agricultural land for  can use to promote organic farming. This will also in-
organic farming can be achieved in the foreseeable  clude the coherence of any measures taken.
future. The policy environment will be analysed and 
strategies will be developed to improve the relative  Increasing the fermentation of farm manure 
advantages of particularly sustainable production 
and agricultural residues
methods such as organic farming. In view of the com-
plex interactions involved, selected primary areas of  More manure from livestock farming is to be used to 
action should be combined and interlinked in the  produce biogas. The German government will deter-
future strategy. The choice of those areas of action  mine the extent to which the use of livestock manure 
should be pragmatically oriented to the key question  to generate energy can be funded beyond current  
of “what can be done in particular at the national  levels. However, the possibility of this contributing to a 
level?”  poorer climate performance must be ruled out. 
Proposals that will lead to greater growth of organic 
Reducing emissions from livestock farming
farming and further improve the contribution of 
organic practices to sustainability will take centre  A considerable percentage of the greenhouse gas emis-
stage. In that respect, the future strategy is intended  sions from agriculture is due to the production of 
to ensure that other approaches also receive effective  animal-based food. However, using permanent grass-
land to ensure food security is inconceivable without 
livestock farming. Against that background, funding 
to increase scientific and technical knowledge and in-
novation and ensure that it is put into practice more 
quickly will be essential. Research on the develop-
ment of more climate-compatible livestock farming is 
needed, for example in the areas of feed, breeding and 
farm management. 
The German government is focusing its funding more 
on ensuring that the number of animals being raised 
does not exceed a maximum of two livestock units per 
hectare. 
The government is developing an overall strategy to 
reduce emissions from livestock farming by 2021 and 
will intensify research in this area.66 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
Avoiding food waste Developing innovative climate action  
concepts in the agricultural sector
Almost one-third of all food in Germany is lost in the 
form of avoidable and unavoidable food waste. Most  Agricultural research occupies a key position. Oppor-
of the losses occur at the level of private households  tunities for agricultural production and use will result 
(61 percent) and large-scale consumers (the restau- from a systematic consideration of agricultural pro-
rant and outside catering business), as well as at the  duction and all upstream and downstream areas.
retail level. It is estimated that two-thirds of food 
waste in homes could be avoided. The possibilities 
for avoiding food waste in other sectors of the value 
5.6   Climate action in land use 
chain have not yet been exhausted, and research is 
being done on this issue.  and forestry
The German government plans to expand the “Too 
Initial situation
good for the bin” campaign launched by the Federal 
Ministry of Food and Agriculture in March 2012 into  Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) are 
a national strategy for reducing avoidable food waste  combined according to the nomenclature of the UN 
and losses. The aim of the strategy is to halve food  Framework Convention on Climate Change. To date, 
waste and losses in Germany by 2030. emissions (such as those from the degradation of humus) CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 67
and carbon sequestration (for example by forests) have  objectives of the Forestry Strategy 2020, other aspects 
not been included in assessments of whether climate  include using sustainable forestry management to take 
action targets are being reached. Land use offers out- advantage of the potential for reducing CO and the 
2
standing potential, not only because emissions can be  closely-associated use of wood, permanent grassland 
reduced but also because it is possible for carbon to be  conservation, protection of peatlands and potential of 
stored (sink function). At the same time, however, there  natural forest development to mitigate climate change. 
is a great deal of variability in this sector, and it is subject 
to the influence of a range of natural and human factors.  The guiding principle for 2050 is closely aligned with 
the findings of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Approximately 58 million tonnes of net CO equivalent  Change (IPCC), according to which forest conservation 
2
were sequestered in German forests in 2014. Wood prod- and sustainable forest management are an appropri-
ucts can also store carbon, tying up some two million  ate and cost-effective way to reduce greenhouse gas 
tonnes of CO equivalent. In contrast, emissions from  emissions. This simultaneously has positive ancillary 
2
drained peatlands (arable land and grassland) totalled  effects on adaptation to climate change and sustainable 
38 million tonnes of CO equivalent due to the release  development. At the same time, climate action meas-
2
of organic matter. Additional greenhouse gas emissions  ures must take into account the importance of forests 
result from peat extraction (two million tonnes of CO  as habitats for flora and fauna, places for water storage, 
2
equivalent) and settlements on peatlands (3.5 million  economic factors, suppliers of raw materials and spaces 
tonnes of CO equivalent). The total net amount seques- where people can engage in recreational activities or 
2
tered in the LULUCF sector was 16.5 million tonnes of  simply enjoy the peace and quiet they offer. 
CO equivalent. This sector is currently a net sink, and 
2
additional measures will be taken to safeguard it.  Wood is a renewable raw material that can store carbon 
over the long term when it is used as a material, for 
When accounting for forestry’s contribution to cli- example in the building sector, and it can also replace 
mate change mitigation, it must be kept in mind that  materials with more detrimental greenhouse gas or 
emissions avoided by producing materials and energy  environmental footprints, as well as fossil fuels. If wood 
from wood that are directly related to the raw material  is used as a source of energy, it must be ensured that it 
supplied by the forestry sector are not classified under  comes from legal, sustainable forestry and that the sink 
that source group. Instead, the reduced emissions are  function of forests is not impaired (see Section 5.2). The 
reflected in the energy sector, construction and housing,  cascade use of wood should have priority whenever 
transport and industry and business sectors or source  possible and appropriate. It should also be kept in mind 
groups. that wood is a renewable resource that can be used 
only within the limits of sustainable forest manage-
For example, it is estimated that the use of biogenic  ment, and care should to be taken to ensure that wood 
solid fuels to generate electricity and heat reduced CO  imports were produced using forestry practices that are 
2
emissions in Germany by 31 million tonnes in 2014. The  legal and as sustainable as possible.
Thünen Institute also estimates that replacing energy-
intensive raw materials with wood brought about simi- To protect peatlands, peat extraction should be pro-
lar reductions in emissions that are attributed to other  gressively reduced with a view to shutting it down 
sectors. However, both estimates also include biogenic  one day. There should be no further conversion of 
solids of foreign origin. Emissions associated with sup- peatlands, and permanent grassland should not be 
plying them may therefore be reported in the green- ploughed up.
house gas inventories of other countries.
The increase in land developed for settlement and 
Guiding principle for 2050 and   transport infrastructure (land take) should be reduced 
to 30 hectares per day by 2020 and then further re-
transformation pathway
duced so that by 2050 at the latest land use is also part 
The focus for this area of action in the guiding prin- of the circular economy and there is “no net land take” 
ciple for 2050 is on maintaining and improving the  as set out in the EU Roadmap to a Resource Efficient 
ability of forests to act as a sink. As described in the  Europe.68 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
Milestones for 2030 the federal government and the Länder on peatland 
protection and a strategy to preserve peatlands (or-
Achieving the guiding principle for 2050 will require  ganic soils) will be developed and implemented to 
making every effort to successfully implement the  that end. In addition to effective greenhouse gas 
climate action guiding principle of the Forestry Strat- reduction, the planning process must take into ac-
egy 2020 and the following milestones between now  count aspects of nature conservation and the ability 
and 2030: to implement measures in a way that is compatible 
with the needs of society and the economy. A grass-
Adapting forests to climate change is particularly im- land strategy is also being developed and will soon be 
portant for safeguarding and expanding the contribu- implemented. 
tion of forestry to climate change mitigation. Sustain-
ably managed, productive forests that are appropriate  Land take is to be reduced to less than 30 hectares per 
for their location, vital, near-natural and adapted to  day by 2030.
climate change – and primarily made up of native 
tree species, a target specified in the Forestry Strategy  Measures
2020 – will be able to safeguard all functions of forests, 
including climate change mitigation. Various climate action measures are already starting 
to take hold in the area of land use, land-use change 
Work will continue to convert forests to climate- and forestry (LULUCF). For example, in the context 
compatible mixed forests made up of tree species  of the Joint Task for the Improvement of Agricultural 
appropriate for their location. When wood is used to  Structures and Coastal Protection, German govern-
generate energy it must, whenever possible and ap- ment funds are being used to support forest conver-
propriate, be either residual or waste wood that can  sion measures that will also take climate change into 
no longer be used as a material or be at the end of  account. The measures are aimed at forest adaptation 
cascade use. It is also crucial to ensure that it is not  based on growing a climate-tolerant and climate-
detrimental to the forest’s function as a sink. adapted mix of tree species. 
The German government advocates adding solid bio- The German government’s Forest Climate Fund is 
fuels to the scope of current EU sustainability criteria  funding measures to maintain and expand the poten-
to ensure that imports of wood into Germany do not  tial of forests and wood to reduce CO and to help Ger-
2
cause forest degradation in the various countries of  man forests adapt to climate change. This is intended 
origin as a result of non-sustainable forms of use. to support achievement of the German government’s 
climate targets.
Issues related to increasing forests’ contribution to 
climate change mitigation, sustainable forestry and  Both sets of measures have proven themselves and are 
intelligent use of wood must be closely intermeshed  being further developed. Additional government meas-
with the requirements of resource and material ef- ures include the following:
ficiency. In its new edition of the Charter for Wood, 
the Federal Ministry of Food and Agriculture plans to  Conservation and sustainable management 
develop measures to enhance the contribution made 
of forests
by the sustainable use of wood to achieving climate 
action targets. →  We aim to increase the amount of forested land in 
Germany. New forests primarily made up of native 
To reduce emissions from organic soil, the lack of  tree species will be planted wherever it is suitable 
research on alternatives to replace the types of use  and sustainably managed in a near-natural way. 
causing them must be remedied and a corresponding  Offsetting and compensatory measures following 
impact assessment must be done. Particular atten- the clearance of forests, for example in connection 
tion must be paid to local conditions and conflicting  with infrastructure projects, must include reforest-
targets (property rights, food production, use of grass- ation of an area that is at least equal to the size of 
land, strengthening rural areas, conserving the culti- the cleared area.
vated landscape, etc.). Initial progress in counteracting 
the heavy emissions by organic soils on drained peat- →  The German government will work to ensure that 
lands must be made by 2030. An agreement between  greater attention is paid to climate action in the CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 69
of incentives for using wood as an energy source 
to determine whether they are effective with 
regard to climate and sustainability targets.
→  Atmospheric inputs of nitrogen and acids that 
threaten the important functions of forest soils 
for the vitality of forests, climate change mitiga-
tion and biodiversity should be progressively 
reduced. In addition, forest peatlands should be 
restored whenever possible, drainage should be 
stopped and wood harvesting methods should 
be improved to protect soils.
→  Given the limits to forested land and the availability 
of raw materials, wood should be used to extend 
carbon cycles wherever possible and appropriate, 
and should be used as a material before it is used to 
generate energy. This is known as cascade use and, 
since resources in the wood and paper industry are 
scarce, it should be further expanded to take advan-
tage of additional potential. 
→  Barriers to the use of durable wood products, 
forests funding area of the Joint Task for the Im- such as building regulations or the technical 
provement of Agricultural Structures and Coastal  characteristics of materials, should be eliminated. 
Protection. The aim is to fund and maintain more  The German government is working to ensure 
near-natural, productive forests that are adapted to  that legal requirements in the building sector 
climate change and are primarily made up of native  are brought up to the current state of the art and 
tree species. The question of how forestry associ-  scientific knowledge. With regard to using wood 
ations can be funded under this Joint Task to   as a material, additional applications for prod-
provide advice on climate action to private forest  ucts made of hardwood must be developed, and 
owners will be examined. research on possible combinations of wood and 
mineral or fossil materials must be intensified. 
→  The German government considers the reinforce- New, innovative uses for wood products and ma-
ment of international cooperation in the areas of  terials must also be researched and developed. 
conserving, restoring and sustainably managing 
forests to be a primary instrument for counter- →  Improvements in the efficiency of using wood to 
acting continued global deforestation and for  produce materials and energy will help to enhance 
maintaining the diverse functions of forests in the  the effects of wood use on climate change mitigation. 
interest of people and nature, such as climate action  Material and business cycles should be closed by op-
and species protection, and as a vital supplier of raw  timising the practice of recycling recoverables from 
materials over the long term. production processes or using waste wood from 
many different applications (product design, used 
→  The German government will support the wide- wood collection, “urban mining,” and so on). This can 
spread use of certification as an instrument for  be promoted by appropriate incentives and funding 
providing proof that wood products are the result  for research and development, doing feasibility  
of legal, sustainable forestry practices. It also  studies and conducting demonstration projects.
advocates including solid fuels in the scope of 
current EU sustainability criteria. Bilateral agree- →  Reaching climate action targets very much depends 
ments, for example with the aim of importing  on climate-conscious consumer behaviour. Infor-
wood from legal and sustainably managed forests  mation, education and the transfer of knowledge 
only, could be negotiated by 2040 on that basis.  about sustainable forest management and intel-
The government will review the current structure  ligent use of wood for many different applications 70 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
→  The German government will make increased use 
will be intensified and provided to individual target  of possibilities under EU legislation to protect per-
groups using appropriate media. manent grassland on carbon-rich soils.
→  The German government will work at the EU level 
Conservation of permanent grassland
for more effective protection of grassland. The ban 
Conserving grassland protects the high level of carbon  on ploughing grassland on carbon-rich soils will be 
stored in the grassland soil. During the reform of the  a particular priority.
EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), conservation 
of permanent grassland was made an integral part of  →  Protecting carbon-rich soils is very important 
the greening requirements of its first pillar. Specifying  for climate change mitigation, so it has now been 
areas of emphasis for agri-environmental and climate  transposed into national legislation as the Bio-
measures at Länder level is also promoting the con- fuel Sustainability Ordinance and the Biomass 
servation of permanent grassland. Permanent grass- Electricity Sustainability Ordinance based on a 
land in Habitat Directive sites in Germany has been  provision in the EU Renewable Energy Directive 
declared environmentally sensitive, which means that  which applies throughout Europe. This level of 
grassland within these areas may not be converted or  protection for carbon-rich soils such as perman-
ploughed. Conversion of the remaining permanent  ent grassland, peatlands and wetlands has also 
grassland is subject to official approval, which as a  been expanded beyond the energy sector and 
matter of principle is granted only when no other  defined with a view to the climate action targets 
legal provisions prevent it, and is generally subject to  for 2050. Measures at the level of the Länder, 
the requirement of establishing permanent grassland  such as laws on the conservation of permanent 
at another location. This provision is intended to en- grassland, would be appropriate for this, par-
sure that permanent grassland does not decrease by  ticularly where carbon-rich grassland (peatlands 
more than five percent in a single region (Land). and moor soils, wet meadows) is concerned. The CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 71
German government is examining the possibility  environmentally friendly, climate-compatible land 
of creating incentives for this. use. It must be ensured that projects to protect peat-
lands are implemented with the participation of all 
stakeholders in a way that balances the interests of 
Protection of peatlands
society and the economy. 
Considerable quantities of greenhouse gas emissions 
can be absorbed by sinks over the long term thanks to  From the viewpoint of climate action, reducing the 
the increased orientation of peatland conservation to  use of peat as a growing medium also offers great po-
climate action, the expansion of funding programmes  tential for lowering greenhouse gas emissions, which 
to conserve peatlands, and management practices  is why the practice should be severely wound down. 
that are appropriate for local conditions. Germany’s  Sharp reductions in the use of peat by home garden-
federal government is working toward an agreement  ers, horticulture and landscape architecture can be 
with the Länder on the conservation of peatlands  achieved by providing advisory services and informa-
whose aim would be to conserve existing peatlands  tion. To that end, the German government will imple-
and create incentives for investments in water man- ment requirements for the use of peat substitutes in 
agement to protect peatlands.  guidelines on awarding public procurement contracts 
for gardening and landscape architecture. To reduce 
The German government will examine the possibility  peat extraction, the government will institute meas-
of consistent, permanent funding for paludiculture at  ures to provide advice and information on the use of 
the same time. peat substitutes for gardening. It will create a research 
programme on peat substitutes and expand the  
Pilot projects and measures to protect peatlands  advisory and information measures. 
and promote climate-compatible management 
of water levels can also be discussed and imple-
mented, along with the establishment of appropriate, 72 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
Reducing land take Improving the system of taxes and levies to 
make it climate-friendly
The increase in land development for settlement and 
transport infrastructure (land take) is to be reduced to  Environmental taxes and environment-related charges 
30 hectares per day in accordance with the national  can also serve as cost-efficient incentives for a climate-
Sustainable Development Strategy. Actions by the Ger- friendly economy. They make resource consumption 
man government will include improving the relevant  more expensive and, when properly configured, cre-
planning instruments and examining the implementa- ate cost-effective incentives for a climate-friendly 
tion of new instruments. economy. They have proven to be an effective instru-
ment for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, so future 
efforts will build on them. The German government’s 
5.7   Overarching goals and 
environmental tax reform in 1999 is an important ex-
measures ample of this. It will therefore also have to be determined 
how the system of taxes and levies can be improved 
Transforming the German economy and society to  in a way that will allow climate action targets to be 
make them greenhouse gas neutral will require more  progressively achieved by 2050. In that regard, it must 
than just an integrative, systematic approach. A long  be remembered that environmental damage caused 
preparation will be required in many cases, for example   by individuals, as well as the failure of society and 
when decoupling growth and the consumption of   business to protect the environment, usually result in 
resources or improving the fiscal and financial sys- higher costs than those associated with improving the 
tem to make it more climate-friendly. Overlaps with  system of taxes and levies. In some cases, those external 
megatrends such as demographic change or the Digit- costs have not been adequately passed on to polluters; 
al Revolution must be the focus as much as current  in other words, they have not been internalised. The 
challenges, some of which require action in the short  government will increase the economic incentives for 
term. It will therefore be important to integrate the  polluters to reduce environmental damage and move 
transformation process into a fundamental dialogue,  in the direction of sustainable production and con-
design that process so it is cohesive and acceptable  sumption. The adverse environmental impacts of some 
to society and structure a framework for it wisely to  taxes will also be considered. The effects of any changes 
ensure a climate-conscious society and economy. on low-income households and on the international 
competitiveness of the affected industries will also be 
Primary overarching aspects and   appropriately taken into account.
instruments
Moving beyond the fundamental dialogue, it is 
already possible to consider and develop certain 
specific multi-sectoral measures that will help ori-
ent the regulatory framework more to future needs. 
While taking other existing targets into consider-
ation, those multi-sectoral measures can serve as an 
overarching basis for the implementation of climate 
action targets. 
One important multi-sectoral instrument is the  
European Emissions Trading System (see Sections 
3.3, 5.1, and 5.4).CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 73
→  The German government will endeavour to 
Eliminating environmentally harmful  
ensure that investments in infrastructure are 
subsidies
climate-friendly and in the interest of sustainable 
Making our financial and fiscal framework climate- regional public services and that infrastructure is 
friendly includes continuing to eliminate environ- designed to be sustainable.
mentally harmful subsidies. They place a two-fold 
burden on public budgets as a result of increased  →  To that end, the government will examine how 
government spending or lower government rev- the structure of incentives to encourage climate-
enue now and high costs of remedying damage to  friendly investment can be improved (see measures 
health and the environment in the future. on climate reporting in the section on industry and 
business).
The German government will work at the national, 
European and international levels to ensure that  →  The government will work to improve the pre- 
environmentally harmful subsidies are eliminated  requisites for preventing the misallocation of capital.
with due regard for the interests of consumers and 
other aspects of the national economy. Alterna- →  The government will make it known that there 
tively, those subsidies may be diverted into future- are increasing opportunities on the market for 
oriented investments that will benefit society and  making environmentally and climate-friendly in-
the environment. vestments and examine the extent to which they 
can be applied to public-sector investment.
Climate-friendly investments and efficient 
→  Sustainable investment needs investors who are 
financial markets
interested in sustainability and it needs appropriate 
Immense investments in energy, transport and hous- financing instruments and products. The German 
ing infrastructure; education and health; and urban  government will do its utmost in multilateral con-
development and public services in rural areas are  texts to ensure that sustainability goals play a greater 
needed to help advance the economy and society. It is  role, for example in funding provided by the multi-
important to keep the UN Sustainable Development  lateral development banks. The multilateral develop-
Goal of building resilient infrastructure, promoting  ment banks should make a greater contribution to 
inclusive and sustainable industrialisation and foster- the mobilisation of private resources for sustainable 
ing innovation (SDG 9) in mind in that regard. investment than has previously been the case.
Efficient financial markets to encourage  Sustainable trade
climate-conscious investment decisions 
International trade also causes external costs. The fuel 
Global financial flows must also be reconciled with   used for aviation and maritime shipping is subsidised 
internationally agreed climate targets. The German  and/or mostly exempt from taxation. Germany should 
government is part of a G20 study group on this issue.  advocate the elimination of subsidies and appropriate 
The G20 finance ministers have asked the Financial  taxation in this area. Principles of sustainability should 
Stability Board (FSB) to analyse the financial risks re- also play a greater role in trade agreements.
sulting from climate change. The industry-led Task 
Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosure created  Trade in sustainable products and services should be 
in that context has the potential to create greater trans- preferred. Germany will work to achieve this within the 
parency concerning the climate risks to which individ- EU and WTO.
ual companies and investors are exposed. The German 
government supports the work of the FSB.
Assessing societal progress
Promoting and providing incentives for   The pending transformation processes must be so-
cially responsible. The criteria of the UN Sustainable 
climate-friendly investments
Development Goal of ending poverty in all its forms 
Inappropriate incentives to make certain invest- everywhere (SDG 1) play an important role in this. 
ments must be avoided. Stable prosperity and social progress are the result 74 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
not just of the material components but also the  data and provide appropriate levels of information 
intangible components of social prosperity and in- about the environment to the public. One compre-
dividual well-being. This means that any consider- hensive approach to current monitoring of this  
ation and assessment of prosperity must include the  kind throughout Germany is “monitoring the bio- 
combined use of economic goods and infrastruc- economy,” whose focus is on data and analyses  
ture, abilities and relationships in society and above  related to agricultural and general biogenic re-
all a country’s available wealth of ecosystems and  sources and an assessment of their sustainability.
the natural resources that sustain life. This means 
that models other than gross domestic product  Research and development as a driver of in-
(GDP) must be considered. The German government 
novative climate action
will examine whether and to what extent it is pos-
sible to add different benchmarks for prosperity. Climate research provides major stimulus for societal 
and technical innovations, reveals options for action 
and sheds light on new decision-making pathways. 
Harmonising environmental monitoring
Funding for research links socio-economic compe-
The Länder have particular responsibility for collect- tencies and competencies in the natural sciences, 
ing and providing environmental data. Some of that  facilitating cooperation between research and actual 
responsibility has been passed on to local authorities.  practice, which in turn keeps research applications-
Statistical and georeferenced environmental data  oriented. The Paris Agreement has created specific new 
make a particularly important contribution to trans- challenges for research if it is to play a proactive role in 
parency when implementing measures. The assess- the transformation that was agreed to and mapped out 
ment and management of the implementation of  in Paris.
the Climate Action Plan 2050 also rely on a uniform 
basis for data throughout Germany and on the provi- →  Ambitious climate action targets require a cor-
sion of uniform data. Relevant data is sometimes not  responding broadening of the knowledge and 
available for the entire country, and quality some- decision-making base. Consequently, the neces-
times varies (for example, some Länder offer atlases  sary climate model analyses, multi-sector climate 
on energy, climate action and heat requirements  research, development of integrated scenarios for 
which contain information on the distribution of the  possible sustainable development pathways and 
use of renewable energy and the heating demand of  local or regional analyses must be initiated if the 
residential buildings; geoportals containing infor- necessary structural change is to take place.
mation on the status of the cycle path network and 
plans to expand it and on the infrastructure needed  →  The transformation into a society that is green-
for electromobility; summaries of forest and land  house gas neutral must be economically and so-
use with changes in forest and land areas over time;  cially responsible. This means integrated research 
and an emission register showing the type and loca- in the natural and social sciences must continue to 
tion of emissions). Georeferenced data’s value is not  be funded and reinforced in order to identify and 
limited to providing support for monitoring. It can  comprehensively assess options for action.
also be very helpful in visualising progress in imple-
menting the Climate Action Plan 2050 locally, which  →  To give the necessary boost to technological and 
receives a strong response and increases public sup- societal innovations, partnerships for sustainable 
port for activities.  innovations in Germany and throughout the world 
must be established to allow the expansion of those 
In the interest of an effective, broad-based partici- development pathways that are most promising 
pation process and efficient monitoring, the Ger- and compatible with climate action.
man government will work to ensure successful 
implementation of the Climate Action Plan 2050  The German government leads by  
by harmonising appropriate data records for all of 
example
Germany and making them available electronically. 
Standards for the configuration of a European geo- Climate action must also be reflected in administrative 
data infrastructure (INSPIRE) will be used for this,  activities. One way of doing this is for the public sector 
with due regard for the requirement, pursuant to  to lead by example, while activities of the federal ad-
federal and Land laws on environmental informa- ministration itself are relevant for reducing emissions 
tion, to facilitate access to available environmental  and thus for achieving Germany’s climate targets.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 75
particular characteristics of military use and limits 
to the available financing.
→  The government will introduce sustainable mobil-
ity management for the federal administration.
→  Measures are quickly being implemented under the 
Programme of Sustainability Measures in the area 
of mobility, including video conferencing, “job  
tickets” (season tickets paid for by the employer 
under an arrangement with the local public trans-
port provider), company bicycles, electric bicycles, 
offsetting schemes for unavoidable business trips 
and an energy-efficient vehicle fleet.
→  The programme will be reviewed and upgraded in 
2019.
Sustainable procurement
Public procurement that complies with sustainability 
standards can reduce adverse environmental impacts 
Making the federal administration   such as CO emissions, water and energy consumption 
2
greenhouse gas neutral and deforestation along the entire lifecycle of the items 
procured.
As progress is made toward a climate-neutral fed-
eral administration, the German government is also  Since 201, Federation, Länder and local authorities have 
actively contributing to climate action with its own  been working together under the chair of the German 
measures. The Programme of Sustainability Measures,  government in the Alliance for Sustainable Procurement 
which was approved in December 2010 and amended  to achieve a substantial increase in the share of sustain-
in May 2015, has paved the way in areas including fed- able products and services purchased by the public sector. 
eral properties, energy supply, environmental manage-
ment, procurement, mobility and information technol- The Competence Centre for Sustainable Procurement 
ogy (IT). within the Procurement Office of the Federal Ministry 
of the Interior, which was created as part of the Ger-
→  To show progress that has been made, the German  man government’s Programme of Sustainability Meas-
government will systematically record energy con- ures, materially supports the implementation of the 
sumption, the share of renewable energy sources  government’s emission reduction targets by providing 
and CO emissions for federal properties and mobil- centralised advice, information and training on eco-
2
ity, explain changes from the prior year and tighten  nomic, social and environmental aspects of procure-
up any measures where necessary to achieve the  ment for the various procurement offices of the federal 
goal of greenhouse gas neutrality. government, the Länder and local authorities. As part 
of the national Sustainable Development Strategy and 
→  The government will also initiate an exchange of  the Programme of Sustainability Measures, the govern-
best practices among the various levels of the public  ment has also committed to procuring 50 per cent of 
sector. the textiles it purchases (not including special textiles) 
on the basis of social and environmental criteria wher-
→  The government will prepare the energy-efficient  ever possible by 2020. A knowledge database developed 
refurbishment timetable for federal properties to  by the Competence Centre is intended to counteract 
improve the energy performance of the federal  the risk of a loss of knowledge and allow a faster re-
government’s civil buildings and follow it for any  sponse to inquiries.
future building activities. That is also the German 
government’s objective for the upcoming refurbish- The German government will support the work of the 
ment of military buildings, paying attention to the  Alliance for Sustainable Procurement and the further 76 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION
development of the Competence Centre for Sustain- are an important addition, and may take the form of 
able Procurement within the Federal Ministry of the  vocational training and continuing professional de-
Interior. velopment, extracurricular projects, adult education 
programmes or practical activities based on mutual 
learning. Day-to-day consumer decisions also allow 
Green-IT-Initiative
consumers to influence production conditions, the 
The German government’s Green IT initiative repre- environment and climate.
sents the ambition of the federal administration to 
make the use of information technologies energy effi- The reference point for comprehensive education on 
cient and sustainable. The initiative has already reduced  climate action is the UN’s Agenda 2030, adopted in 
energy consumption by IT operations in all federal  2015, which contains 17 Sustainable Development 
departments by 40 percent compared with the year of  Goals. The goal of ensuring inclusive and quality edu-
maximum consumption prior to 2009. The government  cation for all and promoting lifelong learning (SDG 4) 
will continue the initiative.  emphasises the transformative power of education and 
the particular importance of the skills offered by Edu-
Cooperation in the area of climate action cation for Sustainable Development (ESD) in the im-
plementation of all SDGs. ESD courses about climate 
Climate action can only be successful in the future if it  action cover diverse themes and dimensions of daily 
is considered and implemented at all levels and by all  life and develop possibilities for action by individuals 
stakeholders.  and society. They are carefully tailored to specific tar-
get groups, are appropriate for the groups being ad-
Specific opportunities to participate with low barriers  dressed and are designed to foster participation. 
to entry will be key for making the public more aware 
of their own responsibility for climate action and in- Given the diversity of Germany’s federally structured 
creasing the their resilience to negative changes. This  educational system, networking and cooperation by 
can also contribute to inclusion and empowerment.  stakeholders, a willingness to participate in organ-
These opportunities – some of which already exist or  isational learning and a timely transfer of scientific 
can be expanded – include the provision of informa- knowledge to teaching and learning practices at all 
tion and a variety of ways for people to change their  levels are a prerequisite for effective training and 
consumption behaviour, play a proactive role, and be- education in the area of climate action.
come involved in networks in their own lives. The  
German government therefore supports “change  →  The German government will maintain and im-
agents,” people who will help society to move in the di- prove its support for stakeholders and training and 
rection of sustainability, including in the context of the  education about climate action provided along the 
National Climate Initiative (NKI). The government will  entire educational chain in the framework of fed-
fund studies under real-life conditions to test sustain- eral educational structures.
able lifestyles, forms of work and economic approaches. 
It will also continue to develop and promote a culture  →  The government will integrate training and educa-
of participation. tion about climate action into its current and future 
funding lines.
Education and training
→  As part of the National Climate Initiative (NKI), 
Effective action to achieve transformative climate  funding will continue for climate action projects 
action that will help shape societal changes requires  in schools and non-school educational facilities to 
more than knowledge about interconnections and  increase the awareness of children, adolescents and 
interactions. It also requires an opportunity to test  young adults about climate action and promote op-
and improve that knowledge in actual practice.  portunities to participate in climate action.
When climate competence is taught at all points in 
a person’s formal educational path using many dif- →  The government will do educational work in the 
ferent methods, know-how can be continuously  area of international development policies to pro-
updated. In addition to schooling, training, university  mote critical engagement with development and 
studies and work, opportunities to gain additional  climate policy issues and encourage personal com-
knowledge in people’s personal or professional life  mitment.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 77
advice and training is already available in this area, 
Information
including the SME Initiative for Energy Reforms and 
The German government is examining how to  Climate Change Mitigation or the “Klimaprofi für den 
implement a long-term overarching information  Mittelstand” project, which offers free advice to small 
campaign – Climate Action 2050 – that will provide  and medium-sized businesses. Climate action projects 
ongoing information for specific target groups con- for companies will also be funded through the NKI.
cerning climate targets, ways to achieve them and 
the implementation of current climate action meas- →  The German government will continue to fund 
ures. This overarching campaign will be coordinated  projects that fulfil one of the following criteria: 
with federal educational and information campaigns  contribute to increasing the level of awareness and 
in specific sectors to avoid duplicate efforts and to  to the implementation of knowledge relevant to 
pinpoint interactions among them.  climate issues in all occupations recognised as re-
quiring official qualifications; implement planning 
The German government will seek a dialogue with  and production processes in day-to-day work; en-
society on key areas of life and provide funding for  courage the acquisition of additional qualifications 
the provision of information and advice (such as the  needed to implement climate action measures at 
Information and Competence Centre for Sustainable  work (particularly those that enhance recognised 
Building/Efficiency House Plus with Electromobil- job profiles instead of – as is often the aim – creat-
ity; climate-friendly investing, the promotion of  ing new ones); support measures to promote cli-
sustainable consumption, and sustainable public  mate action in the area of career counselling.
procurement using information platforms such as 
“siegelklarheit.de,” which explains the meaning of  →  The government will continue to pursue measures 
environmental labels, and the Sustainability Com- that have proven successful, update them where 
pass, which provides information on sustainable  applicable and also use them as a blueprint for new 
public procurement. activities.
→  The government is taking advantage of multi-
Climate action in companies
stakeholder initiatives by business and civil society 
Climate action also takes place within companies and  to support the implementation of environmental 
as a result of their efforts. A great deal of information,  and social welfare standards along global supply 
chains (such as the Sustainable Cocoa Forum and 
the Partnership for Sustainable Textiles).
Climate action by local authorities
Climate action is not considered to be an integral part 
of local public services. It is true that many towns and 
cities in Germany have been very dedicated to climate 
action and energy efficiency for years now. However, it 
is not always self-evident for local authorities to spe-
cifically take climate action into account in the context 
of their self-government responsibilities (such as land 
use planning or the management of any property they 
own). Yet active involvement at the regional and local 
levels is important for many climate action efforts. 
The federal government will therefore examine how 
regional and local authorities can successfully be per-
suaded to accord greater importance to climate action 
and how the activities of those authorities can be rein-
forced.Implementing and 
6 
updating the Climate 
Action Plan
The German government’s Climate Action Plan is re- This is intended to establish a comprehensive 
viewed and updated in accordance with the five-year  framework for the German climate action strategy 
reviewing cycle of NDCs under the Paris Agreement.  which will be reliable over the short, medium and 
The first update will take place when the Parties to the  long term. The update will define targets for reduc-
Paris Agreement must submit new NDCs, by late 2019  ing greenhouse gas emissions, specify measures and 
or early 2020 at the latest.  adjust them where necessary, make implementation 
transparent and create a framework for climate ac-
The intermediate targets and milestones, the relevant  tion policies as a task for the country as a whole under 
transformation pathways and the associated meas- Germany’s federal system of government.
ures will be continuously reviewed as part of a learn-
ing process to ensure that they are consistent with 
Programmes of measures
achieving the targets that have been set. If necessary, 
they will be adapted in response to technical develop- To ensure that the 2030 targets are achieved, in 2018 
ments and societal, political and economic trends and  the Climate Action Plan 2050 will be underpinned 
changes, as well as the latest scientific findings.  with a programme of measures having quantifiable CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / CABINET RESOLUTION 79
effects on reductions. The environmental, social and  dialogue process will be organised will be taken 
economic impacts of each programme of measures  following evaluation of the broad dialogue on the 
will be assessed. This means that the update of the  Climate Action Plan 2050 held in 2015/16. The partic-
Climate Action Plan will be followed by a revision of  ipatory processes associated with the Climate Action 
each applicable programme of measures. The latter  Plan 2050 are regularly evaluated and improved.
will underpin each upcoming reduction step and mile-
stone with specific measures, where possible quantified  The implementation and revision of the programmes 
in terms of their impact on emissions reduction. The  of measures are also to include broad-based par-
programmes of measures will be developed in consult- ticipation. The Climate Action Alliance, made up of 
ation with the Bundestag (lower house of parliament). representatives of groups from all parts of society, the 
Länder and local authorities, which was created by 
the German government in 2015, will be continued 
Scientific support process
for that purpose. It will support the implementa-
Reviewing and updating the Climate Action Plan and  tion of measures that have been approved and of 
developing and revising programmes of measures  the Climate Action Programme 2020, as well as the 
requires scientific analyses of scenarios and of the ef- programmes of measures for the Climate Action Plan 
fectiveness, costs, results and ancillary effects, as well  2050; facilitate the activation of existing potential, 
as the economic and social opportunities and risks of  including as a result of networking with individual 
the chosen pathways and strategic measures that are  participants in the Climate Action Alliance; and iden-
implemented.  tify additional possibilities for action.
A scientific platform made up of selected institutions 
Monitoring
doing research in the natural and social sciences will 
perform that task as part of a broad science-based  The German government prepares climate action 
support process. The platform will prepare scientific  reports every year so that it can regularly examine the 
experts’ reports and assessments of issues relevant to  implementation and fulfilment of goals, and it will 
climate action for the review and updating of the Cli- continue to do this after 2020 so that any necessary 
mate Action Plan and the revision of the programmes  adjustments can be made. The climate action reports 
of measures, thereby generating knowledge that will  follow the existing format to show progress in imple-
offer guidance and support decision-making. menting measures under the current programmes of 
measures, current trends for emissions in the vari-
ous areas of action and an estimate of the reductions 
Public dialogue process
expected from upcoming steps. The preparation of 
The Climate Action Plan will be reviewed and up- climate action reports is appropriately linked to revi-
dated as part of a public dialogue process with broad  sion of the programmes of measures, which avoids 
participation by the Länder, local authorities, the pri- duplicate effort as far as possible. Any current report-
vate sector, civil society and the public. The dialogue  ing requirements and formats are properly taken into 
will also include the formulation of guiding prin- account.
ciples and transformation pathways (“Vision 2050”) 
to achieve the goal of making Germany largely green- Regular reports are made to the Bundestag.
house gas neutral. The decision on how the public 80 KLIMASCHUTZPLAN 2050 
Annex to the Climate 
C 
Action Plan 2050
Abbreviations
AFR100   African Forest Landscape Restoration Initiative
AREI   Africa Renewable Energy Initiative
BVT   Best available techniques 
CAP   EU Common Agricultural Policy
CCS   Carbon capture and storage
CCU   Carbon capture and utilisation
CDP   Carbon Disclosure Project 
Cf.   Compare, refer to
CHP   Combined heat and power
CO   Carbon dioxide
2
CO equivalent   Standard unit used to compare the emissions from different greenhouses gases based on their 
2
global warming potential (GWP).
COP 21   21st Conference of the Parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change
DIN   DIN standard (developed by DIN, the German Institute for Standardization)
eFuels   Electricity-based vehicle fuels
ESD   Education for Sustainable Development (UN)
ESD   Effort Sharing Decision; a decision to share the burden of reducing those emissions not  
covered by the Emissions Trading System across EU Member states in order to achieve the 2030 
climate target (EU)
ETS   Emission Trading System (EU)
EU   European Union
ExWoSt   Experimental housing and urban development projectCLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX 81
F-gases   Fluorinated greenhouse gases
FSB   Financial Stability Board; an international body that monitors and makes recommendations 
about the global financial system
G7   Group of Seven; informal forum of countries comprising Canada, France, Germany, Italy,  
Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States of America
GDP   Gross domestic product 
GHG   Greenhouse gases
ha   Hectare
HGV   Heavy goods vehicle
ICAO   International Civil Aviation Organization
ICT   Information and communications technology 
IKI   International Climate Initiative
IMO   International Maritime Organization
INSPIRE   “INfrastructure for SPatial InfoRmation in Europe; Project to create a European Union spatial 
data infrastructure to support EU environmental policies”
IPCC   Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
ISO   International Organization for Standardization
IT   Information technology 
kg   Kilogram
kg N/ha   Kilogram of nitrogen per hectare 
kWh/m2a   Kilowatts hours per square metre per annum 
LNG   Liquefied natural gas
LOHC   Liquid organic hydrogen carrier
LU   Livestock unit
LULUCF   Land use, land-use change, forestry
MRV   Monitoring, reporting, verification
MSR   Market Stability Reserve (Emission Trading System) 
N   Nitrogen
NAP   National Adaptation Plan (UNFCCC)
NAPE   National Action Plan on Energy Efficiency
NDC   Nationally Determined Contributions (UNFCCC)
NEC Directive   EU National Emission Ceilings Directive
NER   New Entrants Reserve (Emission Trading System)
NERC Directive   EU Directive on National Emission Reduction Commitments 
NKI   National Climate Initiative
Pkm   Passenger kilometres82 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX
REDD+   Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation and the role of conservation,  
sustainable management of forests and enhancement of forest carbon stocks in developing 
countries
SDG   Sustainable Development Goals 
SMEs   Small and medium-sized enterprises
t   Tonne (metric)
TWh   Terawatt hours
UN   United Nations
UNFCCC   United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
USD   United States dollar
WTO   World Trade OrganisationCLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX 83
Glossary
Agenda 2030 The aim of the United Nation’s Agenda 2030 (formerly Post-2015 Agenda) is 
to make global development environmentally and economically sustainable 
and in doing so ensure future generations have the opportunity to lead 
fulfilled lives. 
Ambition mechanism   The global reductions achieved – such as the sum of all the targets of the 
parties to the UNFCCC – will be reviewed every five years from 2020 onwards. 
National climate targets must be as ambitious as possible and the level of 
ambition must be ratcheted up with each review.
Benchmark A reference value that makes it possible to continually compare products, 
services, processes and methods with those of competitors. The aim is to close 
the gap to the best example in each category.
Bike sharing See car sharing.
Bioeconomy An economy that relies on renewable instead of fossil resources.
Biogenic solid fuels  Solid biomass that can either be directly burned (wood, straw) or processed to 
make it combustible (for example as pellets). 
Car sharing Catch-all term for various models for shared use of vehicles. They are based 
on the realisation that, as a rule, cars in Germany are driven for one hour 
a day on average and parked for the remaining 23 hours. There are similar 
models for bike sharing. 
Carbon capture and storage  Carbon dioxide is captured and then stored. There is a lack of consensus 
(CCS) about how many potential storage sites are available in Germany. The use of 
CCS has been subject to regulation in Germany under the Carbon Dioxide 
Storage Act (Gesetz zur Demonstration der dauerhaften Speicherung von 
Kohlendioxid) since 24 August 2012.
Carbon capture and utilisation  Carbon dioxide is captured and used, in particular as a chemical raw material 
(CCU) (cascade use). Pilot projects are currently running in Germany. 
Carbon leakage Shifting industrial production and the resulting greenhouse gas emissions 
from Germany to other countries. The effects of this on emissions, and hence 
on the global climate, depend on the conditions under which production at 
the new site takes place and is regulated.
Carbon sink See sink.
Cascade use Use of a resource over different stages, for example first as a material and only 
then to produce energy.84 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX
CO Building Rehabilitation  A federal government funding programme, which consists of a number of 
2
Programme elements including an energy-efficient construction and energy efficiency 
modernisation programme. Private individuals, housing companies and 
cooperatives, developers and owners of residential homes, and local 
authorities can submit applications to KfW Development Bank.
CO equivalent The global warming potential of emissions of different gases is calculated as 
2
a carbon dioxide equivalent to make it possible to compare them. See also 
fluorinated gases.
Common Agricultural Policy  The EU Common Agricultural Policy provides funding both for farmers and 
(CAP) rural regions. A total of 6.2 billion euros per year in EU agricultural funding is 
available in Germany from 2014 to 2020.
Compact cities Urban development paradigm which prefers a mix of uses and compact 
development so that great distances do not have such a prominent influence 
on mobility needs. If destinations (for example shops, cinemas, parks, 
childcare facilities) are close by, people do not have to travel as far to reach 
them but their mobility is just as great. Shorter distances save time and money.
Combined use Use of a by-product in addition to a principal raw material or product, 
especially in the case of agricultural raw materials.
Culture of participation Establishing the continuous participation of interest groups and individual 
members of the public ahead of key policy decisions. 
Decarbonisation Decarbonisation is achieved by all sectors of the economy switching to a 
mode of operation that does not produce carbon dioxide emissions. This 
usually happens by switching to a different fuel or changing the energy 
source used. 
Digital Revolution The change triggered by digitalisation and the widespread use of computers, 
which has brought a change in virtually all areas of life since roughly the turn 
of the millennium. 
Digitisation of the  The Act on the Digitisation of the Energy Transition (Gesetz zur 
Energiewende  Digitalisierung der Energiewende) regulates in particular the launch of smart 
metering systems. It defines how costs are dealt with and sets price caps for 
the installation of a smart metering system, which will be installed initially 
for large-scale consumers and generation facilities. Only when this phase has 
been completed will it be installed for small-scale electricity consumers. 
Disruptive innovation Innovation that displaces existing technology, products or services, possibly 
completely.
Ecodesign Directive  European legal framework that can be used to stipulate requirements 
concerning the environmentally sound design of energy-related products.
Ecosystem A dynamic complex of communities of flora, fauna and microorganisms 
and their inanimate environment, which interact with one another as a 
functional entity.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX 85
Effort Sharing Decision, ESD Decision within the EU on how to distribute reduction obligations across 
the Member States in order to meet the EU climate target for 2030. The ESD 
applies only those emissions not covered by the EU Emissions Trading System 
(ETS).
Electric vehicle  A vehicle driven by electricity using a battery that can be externally charged. 
A distinction is made between pure battery-electric vehicles, plug-in vehicles 
and plug-in-hybrid vehicles, which have a conventional combustion engine 
as well as an electric motor. Hybrid vehicles that run only on petrol or diesel 
and cannot be externally charged are not included in this category. 
Electricity market design The purpose of the electricity market is to guarantee supply at all times, 
such as meet the demand for electricity. Since the electricity market was 
liberalised, electricity can be traded on the European Energy Exchange (EEX) 
in Leipzig. This exchange not only trades electricity but also coal, gas and 
CO allowances. The various options for trading electricity are referred to as 
2
electricity market design.
Emissions Trading System  An EU-wide instrument that puts a market price on emissions by limiting 
(ETS) the total number of permissible emissions and issuing emission allowances 
accordingly. If the price of CO is high enough, incentives to reduce emissions 
2
are created. 
Empowerment Strategies and measures to give individuals and groups greater opportunities 
for autonomy and self-determination. This is meant to enable them to better 
defend their own interests (once more).
Energiewende Transition from using fossil fuels (especially coal, gas, oil, uranium) to an 
energy supply based on renewables. Increasing energy efficiency and energy 
saving are central elements. 
Energy efficiency Rational use of a given amount of energy, in other words using less energy to 
provide the same service at all conversion stages. See also Energiewende. 
Environmental Innovation  A BMUB programme which funds demonstration projects that implement 
Programme  innovative technology to lessen environmental impact on an industrial scale 
for the first time. 
ESD See Effort Sharing Decision.
ETS See Emissions Trading System.
Existing buildings Buildings that exist and are in use, such as not newly constructed or still at 
the planning or design stage. 
Farm manure Organic substances such as slurry or dung that occur in agriculture and 
forestry and can be used as fertilisers.
Fleet (motor vehicles) In this context: the entire range of vehicles of any given manufacturer. 86 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX
Fluorinated gases Chlorofluorocarbons and (halogenated) hydrofluorocarbons (CFCs and HFCs) 
and sulphur hexafluoride (SF). The global warming potential of F-gases is 100 
6
to 24,000 times higher than that of CO. 
2
Food security Availability and continuous access to food, along with an understanding of 
what constitutes a healthy diet and the opportunity to put that into practice. 
Fuel cell drive systems A drive system for vehicles based on hydrogen. Hydrogen and oxygen react in 
the fuel cell, releasing energy from the hydrogen in the form of electricity and 
heat. 
German Resource Efficiency  This programme was adopted in 2012 and contains targets, guiding principles 
Programme  and approaches to conserving natural resources. Its update – ProgRess II – 
was adopted in 2016.
Greenhouse gas emissions  Release of gaseous compounds that absorb and emit radiation, thus 
contributing to the greenhouse effect. The Kyoto Protocol cites six 
greenhouse gases: carbon dioxide (CO), methane (CH), nitrous oxide 
2 4
(NO) and the fluorinated gases (F-gases): hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) 
2
perfluorocarbons (PFCs) and sulphur hexafluoride (SF). From 2015, nitrogen 
6
trifluoride (NF) also has to be included as a greenhouse gas. In Germany, 
3
carbon dioxide accounts for over 80 percent of greenhouse gases emitted.
Greenhouse gas neutrality The net of all greenhouse gas emissions and removals must be zero. Any 
remaining emissions must be offset appropriately – for example absorbed by 
plants. 
Growing medium Material that provides a space in which the roots of plants can grow and be 
supplied with nutrients, air and water.
Impact assessment A procedure meant to structure and support the development of policy 
measures. In the EU, an impact assessment includes:
Recording and evaluating the problem and targets;
Identifying the principal options for achieving the targets and analysing the 
likely economic, environmental and social consequences;
Obtaining an overview of the advantages and disadvantages of each option 
and investigating possible synergies and compromises.
Inclusion Ensuring individuals feel part of society. The term is mostly used to refer to 
including all individuals – both those with disabilities and those without 
disabilities. 
Industry 4.0 Process of linking industrial production with information and 
communications technology.
Internalisation of external  Allocation of external costs to the party causing the external effect in keeping 
costs with the polluter pays principle (see separate entry). This would eliminate the 
misallocation of these costs which impact on the national economy.
International Climate  German climate finance instrument; funding has totalled approx. 1.7 billion 
Initiative (IKI) euros since the programme was launched in 2008. 
Investment cycle  An investment cycle describes the period between an investment being made 
and being fully written down. The length of an investment cycle therefore 
varies across sectors. Different macroeconomic factors also play a role and 
can influence the beginning and length of an investment cycle. CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX 87
Joint Task for the Improvement  The Joint Task for the Improvement of Agricultural Structures and Coastal 
of Agricultural Structures and  Protection is the principal national instrument for funding agriculture 
Coastal Protection  and forestry to ensure it is efficient, competitive and can meet any future 
requirements. It also funds coastal protection and vital rural areas. A total 
of more than one billion euros per year in funding is available through this 
instrument. 
Life cycle assessment A procedure for recording and evaluating all processes that impact on the 
environment. Originally developed chiefly to evaluate products, it is now also 
used for processes, services and behaviour patterns. 
Lock-in effect The third phase of path dependency (see separate entry), in which even 
plainly evident alternatives to the path embarked upon are not chosen.
Material flows The directed movement of materials and mixtures of materials. There are 
natural material flows such as nutrient cycles in ecosystems and materials 
flows instigated or altered by people such as raw material flows and waste 
flows. 
Mobility The ability to move from one place to another. Mobility does not depend on 
distance travelled but on the accessibility of destinations and the available 
modes of transport to reach them.
Mobility and Fuels Strategy  Adopted in 2013. An overview of technologies and alternative fuels for 
different modes of transport, it is seen as a “learning strategy” pointing to 
possible pathways to achieving the Energiewende in the transport sector.
Modal split The percentage share of each mode of transport in passenger and freight 
transport. (See also passenger kilometres and tonne kilometres). 
National Action Plan on Energy  A comprehensive package of measures to increase energy efficiency, adopted 
Efficiency (NAPE) by the federal cabinet in December 2014. It is also an important element of 
the Climate Action Programme 2020, which was also adopted in December 
2014. 
National Climate Initiative  An instrument for funding domestic climate action projects. Target groups 
(NKI) include local authorities, educational institutions, businesses and consumers. 
National Cycle Paths Plan  Strategic policy document by the federal government, in which it sets out its 
cycling policy.
Nationally Determined  All Parties to the UNFCCC were called upon at the 2015 Climate Change 
Contributions (NDCs) Conference in Paris to submit INDCs – Intended Nationally Determined 
Contributions. They are now obliged to submit actual, not merely intended, 
pledges which are known as Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs). 
These set out the countries’ greenhouse gas emission targets and details of 
how they intend to go about fulfilling their pledges. The UNFCCC Secretariat 
reviews the submissions and ascertains the overall climate benefit. 
National Sustainable  Since the National Sustainable Development Strategy was adopted in 2002 it 
Development Strategy has set the course for sustainable development in our country. The strategy is 
reviewed and updated at regular intervals. 88 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX
Nitrogen surplus The quantity of nitrogen in farmland soil over and above the amount 
theoretically needed to replace the amount removed from that soil by 
agricultural use.
The German government will publish an integrated nitrogen report in 2017, 
which will give a breakdown of the nitrogen emissions from the various 
sectors and describe possible approaches to reducing emissions of reactive 
nitrogen. 
Non-residential building All buildings that are not principally intended for residential use. 
Open society Karl Popper’s social model that aims to “release people’s critical faculties.” 
The idea is that state power should be shared as broadly as possible to prevent 
abuse of power. 
Paludiculture Agricultural use of wet raised bogs and fens. 
Passenger kilometres or tonne  The distance travelled by the total number of passengers or tonnes of 
kilometres freight. This distance has quadrupled in passenger and freight transport 
since 1960. Passenger and tonne kilometres are the crucial influence on 
energy consumption and greenhouse gas emissions from transport. The 
number of trips made does not say anything about their length. In terms of 
number of trips, the cycle and pedestrian share in the modal split of many 
towns and cities is often very high, but since these trips are usually relatively 
short, cycling and walking do not play a major role when the modal split is 
considered in terms of passenger or tonne kilometres. 
Path dependency A concept from the social sciences, which says that established pathways 
“reinforce” themselves as a result of positive feedback. This makes it 
increasingly difficult to deviate from an established path even if an 
alternative path proves to be better. 
Pedelec Short for pedal electric cycle: an electric bike that has a motor to assist cyclists 
as they pedal. 
Petersberg Climate Dialogue A dialogue to facilitate informal intergovernmental discussion of 
international climate policy. It has been held annually since it began in 2010.
Plug-in-hybrid drive See electric vehicles.
Precautionary principle A key element in German and EU environmental policy which states that 
negative impacts or harm to human health or the environment must be either 
prevented or minimised.
Primary industry  Industries that obtain raw materials and make them into basic products 
in the industrial value chain. Examples include converting coal into coke, 
refineries converting crude oil, or iron ore being processed to make steel.CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX 89
Procurement, public  Purchase, leasing or rental of goods and services by the public sector. It 
is subject to budgetary and competition law. The key requirements are 
economically effective use of public money and prevention of preferential 
treatment and corruption. Estimates indicate that the public sector’s 
procurement volume is at least 300 billion euros per year. 
Public procurement See procurement.
Public services The government guarantees a basic provision to the public of essential goods 
and services. They include waste disposal, water supply and wastewater 
management, energy supply and public transport. 
Raw material efficiency  Ratio between a benefit or result and the input of raw materials needed to 
produce it. It is often used in the sense of raw material productivity.
Resource efficiency Ratio between a benefit or result and the input of (natural) resources needed 
to produce it. Not to be confused with raw material efficiency. 
Retrofitting Modernisation or upgrading existing installations such as wind turbines. 
Sector coupling Interaction between the different sectors described in the Climate Action 
Plan 2050. Electricity generation plays a major role in the ability of the 
buildings, transport and industry sectors to move towards CO neutrality. 
2
Sink Reservoir that absorbs and stores carbon – either temporarily or permanently. 
The storage capacity of sinks can increase or decrease, which means that the 
amount of stored carbon varies.
Social innovation The creation, establishment and spread of new social practices in different areas 
of society. An example of this is what is known as the “sharing economy,” such 
as the move towards sharing everyday items instead of needing to own them. 
Source principle Principle in UNFCCC accounting rules, by which greenhouse gas emissions 
are accounted for “at the source.”  Emissions caused, for example, by using 
electrical household appliances, are accounted for in the energy sector, which 
is the “source” of the electricity and hence of the emissions. 
Stranded investments Investments that have become unprofitable due to a change in market 
conditions. 
Structural break  In contrast to a lengthy process of economic structural change, a structural 
break refers to the economy having to make a sudden structural adjustment 
with serious consequences for (regional) employment and prosperity.
Structural change A long-term change in the structure (of the economy) in contrast to a 
structural break, which happens spontaneously or at very short notice. 90 CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX
Total resource productivity Production-related indicator for the German economy’s resource efficiency. 
It is the ratio of the imported resources and those extracted from nature to 
the sum of gross domestic product and import expenditure. 
The indicator includes both abiotic and biotic resources and covers 
all imported goods and the total volume of raw materials used during 
production processes.
UNFCCC At the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, 
popularly known as the Earth Summit, which was held in Rio de Janeiro, 
154 countries signed the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change (UNFCCC). This multilateral agreement entered into force in 1994.
Urban mining Concept by which densely populated urban areas are regarded as huge “raw 
material mines” (for secondary raw materials). The aim is to find, identify and 
recover these raw materials. This is already happening to some extent for 
scrap metal, building rubble, glass and paper. 
Waste Prevention Programme  A programme launched by the federal government and Länder in 2013. It 
consists of a compilation of existing and potential measures for avoiding 
waste at federal, Land and local authority level and an assessment of these 
measures against environmental, economic and social criteria. CLIMATE ACTION PLAN 2050 / ANNEX 91
Picture credits
Cover: ooyoo/gettyimages Page 44: Fontanis/Fotolia.com
Page 4: Fritz Poelking/gettyimages Page 46: Caro/Dittrich
Page 10: lisastrachan/Fotolia.com Page 48: RioPatuca Images/Fotolia.com
Page 12: Petair/Fotolia.com Page 50: Sergii Figurnyi/Fotolia.com
Page 14: Paul Langrock/Zenit/laif Page 52: FotoSeller24/Fotolia.com
Page 16: industrieblick/Fotolia.com Page 54: CHROMORANGE/Spremberg/   
Page 18 (left): Rainer Weisflog FOTOFINDER.COM
Page 18 (right): Rainer Weisflog Page 56 (left): powell83/Fotolia.com
Page 20: Romolo Tavani/Fotolia.com Page 56 (right): Rainer Weisflog
Page 22: Joern Boetling/Fotofinder.com Page 59: blende11.photo/Fotolia.com
Page 24 (left): nullplus/Fotolia.com Page 61: Reinhard Eisele/project photos
Page 24 (right): Paul Langrock/Zenit/laif Page 62:  Jürgen Fälchle/Fotolia.com
Page 26: Westend61/Fotolia.com Page 64: Rainer Fuhrmann/Fotolia.com
Page 30: DragonImages/Fotolia.com Page 66: Jürgen Fälchle/Fotolia.com
Page 32: mitifoto/Fotolia.com Page 68: Uwe Wittbrock/Fotolia.com
Page 34: Zoonar.com/Dagmar Richardt Page 70 (left): Petair/Fotolia.com
Page 36: imohn/Fotolia.com Page 70 (right): cmfotoworks/Fotolia.com
Page 38: Christian Schwier/Fotolia.com Page 72: Thomas Trutschel/photothek.net
Page 40: Rainer Weisflog Page 74: Curioso Photography/Fotolia.com
Page 42 (left): Kara/Fotolia.com Page 76: Andrey Popov/Fotolia.com
Page 42 (right): Stephan Laude/Fotolia.com Page 78: Rainer Weisflogwww.bmub.bund.de/english