Sweden’s long-term strategy for 
 
redu  cing greenhouse gas 
 
emissions 
 
 
 
December 2020 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 Index 
Summary............................................................................................. 3 
1  Introduction .............................................................................. 7 
2  Sweden’s climate policy framework ......................................... 9 
2.1  Sweden’s national climate goals ............................................................... 9 
2.2  Sweden’s Climate Act .............................................................................. 12 
2.3  A Climate Policy Council ........................................................................ 13 
3  Sweden’s current conditions and emissions .......................... 15 
3.1  National situation ..................................................................................... 15 
3.2  Sweden’s greenhouse gas emissions and removals .............................. 17 
3.3  Energy ........................................................................................................ 25 
3.4  Digitalisation ............................................................................................. 30 
3.5  Climate change adaptation ...................................................................... 30 
4  Action areas and instruments ................................................ 35 
4.1  Instruments work together to attain Sweden’s climate goals ............. 35 
4.2  Cross-sectoral, overarching policy instruments ................................... 36 
4.3  Transport ................................................................................................... 43 
4.4  Industry ..................................................................................................... 51 
4.5  Electricity and district heating ................................................................ 56 
4.6  Households and services ......................................................................... 60 
4.7  Non-road mobile machinery .................................................................. 65 
4.8  Waste.......................................................................................................... 67 
4.9  Agriculture ................................................................................................ 71 
4.10  Land use, land use change and forestry, LULUCF ............................. 74 
5  Consequences of Sweden’s goals and actions ...................... 79 
5.1  Consequences of failing to meet the climate targets ........................... 79 
5.2  Consequences of Swedish policy to attain the climate goals ............. 80 
6  Buy-in and realisation – Sweden’s path to goals and measures
  83 
Annex 1 Modelling ............................................................................ 86 
 
Ministry of the Environment  2 (87) 
 
 
 Summary 
Purpose 
Long term strategies shall contribute to fulfilling Parties commitments under 
the UNFCCC and the Paris Agreement to reduce anthropogenic greenhouse 
gas emissions and enhance removals by sinks, and to promote increased 
carbon sequestration. Reporting concerns national long-term objectives for 
territorial emissions. This document constitutes Sweden’s reporting and 
derives from Sweden’s existing targets, and policy instruments and actions 
decided on in the field of energy and climate. The strategy is largely based on 
the national climate policy framework and Government Bill1 En samlad 
politik för klimatet – klimatpolitisk handlingsplan (A coherent policy for the 
climate – climate policy action plan).  
The Swedish Climate Policy Framework  
Under the Paris Agreement, all countries are to contribute towards holding 
the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C and 
pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C. This demands 
wide-ranging action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and also demands 
that every sector of society plays a part in the climate transition. In 2017, the 
Swedish Parliament (Riksdag) adopted a climate policy framework with (1) 
national climate goals, (2) a Climate Act and (3) a Climate Policy Council.  
The climate policy framework’s long-term climate goal establishes that, by 
2045 at the latest, Sweden is to have zero net emissions of greenhouse gases 
into the atmosphere and should thereafter achieve negative emissions. By 
2045, greenhouse gas emissions from Swedish territory are to be at least 85 
per cent lower than emissions in 1990. To achieve net zero emissions, 
supplementary measures may be counted in line with rules decided at 
international level. Supplementary measures may be (1) increased net 
removal of carbon dioxide in forests and land, (2) verified emission 
reductions from investments in other countries, and (3) negative emission 
technologies such as capture and storage of biogenic carbon dioxide 
(BECCS).  
Milestone targets for Swedish territorial emissions in the sectors covered by the 
EU’s Effort Sharing Regulation have been adopted for 2020, 2030 and 2040, 
see Figure 1. Emissions from domestic transport, excluding domestic 
 
1 Prop 2019/20:65 
Ministry of the Environment  3 (87) 
 
 
 aviation which is included in the EU ETS, are to be reduced by at least 70 
per cent by 2030 compared with 2010. 
Figure 1. Sweden’s climate targets (with and without the opportunity to use supplementary 
measures) and historical emissions 
80
70
60
Emissions  Targets for 
50
qe within EU  non-trading  
O 240 ETS  sectors  National net zero target  
C Sweden  for Sweden’s total emissions 
 tM30 by 2045 
20 ESR 
Net negative 
10 emissions 
after 2045 
0
 
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045
 
 
Sweden’s Climate Act imposes an obligation on current and future 
governments to pursue a policy based on the national climate goals. The Act 
contains elements that ensure that the policy is planned and followed up.  
Sweden’s Climate Policy Council is an independent expert body tasked 
with evaluating whether the overall policy decided by the Government is 
compatible with the climate goals.  
The EU’s climate policy has a major impact on how Swedish policy can be 
conducted. The EU's current climate target is to cut greenhouse gas 
emissions by at least 40 per cent in the EU by 2030 compared to 1990. In 
September 2020 the European Commission presented its 2030 Climate 
Target Plan which proposed to increase the target to at least 55 per cent. The 
EU's heads of state and government are expected to endorse such an 
enhanced target at the end of 2020. 
The emissions covered are territorial and do not include the emissions that 
the EU causes outside the EU’s borders. A number of policy instruments at 
EU level, including emission standards for vehicles and emissions trading are 
very important to Sweden’s possibility to meet its own national targets. 
Ministry of the Environment  4 (87) 
 
 
 Sweden uses a number of national and EU-wide policy instruments to meet 
the national climate goals. Emissions pricing forms the basis of governance 
and is supplemented by targeted initiatives. The policy instruments in 
Sweden and the EU span all sectors of society. It is estimated that they will 
help to achieve the targets but that further measures will be needed to fully 
attain them. Areas of possible actions to attain the long-term climate target 
have been identified in the respective sectors. Government spending on 
climate related initiatives has increased substantially in recent years. 
Table 1. Overview of key policy instruments and measures impacting on the national climate 
targets (EU instruments are marked with an asterisk) 
Non-  
Electricity  Homes  road  LULUCF 
Agricultu
Transport   Industry   and district  and  mobile  Waste 
re  
heating  premises  machiner
y 
               
Energy  Energy and  Energy and  Energy  Energy  Ban on  CAP*  Forestry 
and  carbon tax   carbon tax  and  and  combustible  Act 
carbon tax  carbon tax  carbon tax  and organic 
Aid for 
waste in 
EU ETS*  EU ETS*  manure  Environme
landfill 
Emission  Eco- Reduction  gas  ntal Code 
reduction  design  obligation  rules on 
Industrikliv The 
targets for  Directive*  Collection  land 
et (the  Electricity   
new  of methane  drainage 
Industrial  Certificate  Procurem  
vehicles*  from landfill 
Leap)  System  Energy  ent 
Labelling  requireme Protecting 
 
Reduction  Directive*  nts  Waste  forest and 
Energy and  Promoting 
obligation  hierarchy in  land in the 
climate  wind power 
coaches  Building  the  Environme
ntal Code 
Bonus- regulations  Environmen
Support for  and nature 
malus  tal Code 
Energy  solar energy  conservatio
system 
surveys for  Training  n 
companies   programm Landfill tax  agreements 
Tax  Tax  e for low   
reduction  reduction for  energy  The 
for eco- Energistege microproduct buildings  Producer  National 
friendly  t (energy  ion of  responsibilit Forest 
cars  efficiency  renewable  y  Programme 
grants for  energy  Energy   
industry)  and  Advice and 
Cdbiaaosrxebdiod ne-  Eefnfiecrigeny cy    cadlimvicaete   Mwplaausnntneic inipga l  t  raining 
vehicle tax  networks    Energy   
declaration  
Klimatkliv s* 
Klimatklive
et (local 
t (lthe 
investmen
Climate  Market 
t grants) 
Leap)  launch, 
technology 
Climate  developme
Environme
premium  nt, 
ntal Code 
innovation 
clusters 
Act on the 
EU 
Obligation 
Regulation 
to Supply  Informatio
on 
Renewable  n centre 
fluorinated 
Fuels  for 
sustainable 
Ministry of the Environment  5 (87) 
 
 
 Urban  greenhouse  constructi
environme gases  on 
nt 
agreement
   
s 
 
 
Long-term   
infrastruct  
ure 
planning 
Eco bonus 
for 
shipping 
Tax on air 
travel 
EU ETS 
(aviation)* 
  
The costs related to climate change and the cost of failing to act will be very 
high. Several reports2 have shown that the costs of not taking action widely 
exceed the costs of doing so.  
The economic consequences of national policy to attain Sweden’s national 
climate goals are hard to calculate. Many of the consequences will depend on 
how Sweden reaches the goals and under which conditions. In recent 
decades, Sweden has succeeded in combining reduced emissions with strong 
economic development. 
A long-term and stable climate policy is needed if Sweden is to lead the way 
on a global transition. A broad parliamentary majority backs the decision 
made in 2017 on the climate policy framework. It is also vital that Sweden 
involves a broad range of groups in producing and implementing the policy 
and that different actors in society are given every opportunity to play their 
part in the climate transition. Several large actors in Sweden have already 
shown that they have the desire, ambition, conditions and opportunity to 
make their operations climate-friendly while retaining competitiveness. In 
the initiative for a Fossil Free Sweden instigated by the Swedish 
Government, a considerable number of sectors and industries have 
themselves drawn up roadmaps towards very low or zero emissions. The 
initiative is an important platform for dialogue and cooperation between key 
actors for a competitive climate transition. 
 
2 See for example UNEP, 2019, “Changing Course”. https://www.unepfi.org/wordpress/wp-
content/uploads/2019/05/TCFD-Changing-Course-Oct-19.pdf   
Ministry of the Environment  6 (87) 
 
 
 1  Introduction 
Sweden is pleased to submit its long-term strategy in accordance with article 
4.19 of the Paris Agreement, complementing the submission by Croatia and 
the European Commission dated 6 March 2020. The Swedish long-term 
strategy builds on our submission to the European Commission in response 
to Regulation (EU) 2018/1999.  
Climate developments are deeply concerning. The IPCC’s special report 
from October 2018 on the impacts of a global warming of 1.5 °C shows very 
far-reaching consequences of a temperature rise of two degrees. Global 
warming is proceeding at such a pace that ecosystems are unable to adapt in 
time. Humans depend on well-functioning ecosystems, making climate 
change one of the greatest threats of our age. The decisions we make today 
are vital for the planet and for future generations.  
Through the Paris Agreement, the countries of the world have committed to 
limiting global warming to less than 2 °C above pre-industrial levels and 
pursuing efforts to limit the increase to 1.5 °C. The average global 
temperature has already increased by approximately 1,1 °C compared with 
pre-industrial levels and is continuing to rise by around 0,2 degrees per 
decade. 
Though the issue of climate change is now prioritized on the global agenda 
and investments in fossil-free technology are hitting record heights in 
Sweden and across the globe, we have not yet seen a clear and persistent 
turnaround in the upward trend in emissions. In Sweden, territorial 
emissions have been reduced over time, but progress is too slow. Additional 
measures are needed if Sweden is to be able to live up to the commitments 
made in the Paris Agreement, to reach its national emission targets and to 
attain the Government’s ambition of becoming the world’s first fossil-free 
welfare nation.  
The climate goals must be met. Several major climate measures, such as the 
Klimatklivet initiative (the Climate Leap), the reduction obligation, a bonus–
malus-system for new light vehicles, the urban environment agreements, and 
the industrial green investment aid programme Industriklivet (the Industrial 
Leap) are now in place. These reforms pave the way for the transition that 
Sweden has begun and entail us to take important steps towards a society 
that is not dependent on fossil fuels.  
Ministry of the Environment  7 (87) 
 
 
 More ambitious policy instruments are needed, and the climate transition 
needs to be made in such a way that everyone has an opportunity to be part 
of the solution. All sectors of society at all levels (local, regional, national and 
international) need to play their part in the transition towards sustainable, 
fossil-free development. For this to happen, climate policy needs to be 
integrated into all relevant policy areas and at all levels in society. Sweden has 
taken some important steps on this route already. The Government decides 
the rate of emission mitigation and whether they need to increase for the 
climate targets to be met through existing instruments and new measures.  
More than 400 actors from the business community, municipalities, regions, 
research institutions and civil society organisations are working together in 
the Fossil Free Sweden initiative to achieve this aim. 22 sectors have so far 
produced and submitted roadmaps for fossil-free competitiveness to the 
Government. This includes large emitting sectors such as steel, cement, 
mining and minerals and the automotive sector.  
The roadmaps contain proposals for how the sectors intend to bring about 
the transition to fossil-free operation and what the Government can do to 
facilitate this. 
Sweden is one of the countries in the world that has the capacity to lead the 
way and show that a fossil-free society is possible. Besides the Swedish 
Climate Act and ambitious emission targets, there is a broad consensus 
behind the climate transition among the Swedish people and in the Swedish 
business community. Swedish companies lie at the forefront in offering 
innovative solutions. The Government is determined to meet the national 
climate goals and to fulfil Sweden’s commitments under the Paris 
Agreement.  
Ministry of the Environment  8 (87) 
 
 
 2  Sweden’s climate policy 
framework 
Under the Paris Agreement, all countries are to contribute towards holding 
the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2 °C and pursue 
efforts to limit it to 1.5 °C. This demands wide-ranging action to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions and that every sector of society plays a part in the 
climate transition. The climate perspective needs to be integrated in all policy 
areas and at all levels in society.  
In 2017, the Swedish Parliament (Riksdag) adopted a climate policy 
framework for Sweden. The framework was supported by a broad 
parliamentary majority and comprises of three parts: national climate goals, a 
Climate Act and a Climate Policy Council. The climate policy framework brings 
stability to climate policy and sets long-term conditions for business and 
society. The framework is a key component in Sweden’s efforts to comply 
with the Paris Agreement. 
2.1   Sweden’s national climate goals 
There are four main aspects to Sweden’s national climate goals: 
•  An overarching environmental quality objective linked to reducing 
the average global temperature increase (with no time frame). 
•  A long-term emissions target for Sweden for 2045. 
•  Milestone targets for Swedish emissions covered by the EU’s effort 
sharing regulation (i.e. outside the EU Emissions Trading System) for 
2020, 2030 and 2040. 
•  A milestone target for domestic transport (aviation excluded) for 
2030. 
 
2.1.1  The Swedish environmental quality objective – Reduced 
Climate Impact 
To provide a clear structure for environmental efforts in Sweden, the 
Parliament already in 1999 adopted 16 environmental quality objectives. One 
of these, the Reduced Climate Impact, underlies Sweden’s action in 
combatting climate change and that Sweden will work internationally for 
global efforts to be directed towards achieving the temperature goal of the 
Paris Agreement.  
Ministry of the Environment  9 (87) 
 
 
 2.1.2  A long-term emission target for 2045 
By 2045 at the latest, Sweden is to have no net emissions of greenhouse 
gases to the atmosphere, after which negative emissions are to be attained. 
The target means that by 2045 at the latest, greenhouse gas emissions from 
Swedish territory are to be at least 85 per cent lower than emissions in 1990. 
To achieve this aim, the capture and storage of carbon dioxide emanating 
from fossil fuels may be counted as a measure where no other viable 
alternatives exist. Emissions from fuels used for international aviation and 
maritime transport are not included in the target. Emissions and removals 
from land use, land use change and forestry are not included directly.  
To achieve net zero emissions, supplementary measures may be counted in 
line with rules decided at international level. Supplementary measures may be 
(1) increased net removal of carbon dioxide in forests and land, (2) verified 
emission reductions from investments in other countries, and (3) capture 
and storage of biogenic carbon dioxide (BECCS).  
Emissions are calculated in line with Sweden’s international reporting of 
greenhouse gases.  
2.1.3  Milestone targets for 2020, 2030 and 2040 
The Swedish Parliament has decided on three milestone targets to limit 
cumulative emissions and ensure a course that is feasible. The milestone 
targets apply to emissions outside the EU ETS3 in the ESR sector4. The 
targets are as follows: 
 
•  In 2020, greenhouse gas emissions in Sweden in the ESR sector are 
to be 40 per cent lower than in 1990. The Government’s ambition is 
to reach the target with national measures. 
 
•  By 2030 at the latest, greenhouse gas emissions in Sweden in the ESR 
sector are to be at least 63 per cent lower than emissions in 1990. A 
maximum of 8 percentage points of the reduction in emissions may 
be achieved through supplementary measures. 
 
•  By 2040 at the latest, emissions in Sweden in the ESR sector should 
be at least 75 per cent lower than emissions in 1990. A maximum of 
2 percentage points of the reduction in emissions may be achieved 
through supplementary measures.  
 
3 The EU Emissions Trading System 
4 ESR stands for the Effort Sharing Regulation which regulates national emissions in EU Member States. 
Between 2013 and 2020 this is termed the ESD, Effort Sharing Decision. 
Ministry of the Environment  10 (87) 
 
 
  
Figure 2. Sweden’s climate targets (with and without the opportunity to use supplementary 
measures) and historical emissions 
80
70
60
Emissions  Targets for 
50
qe within EU  non-trading  
O 240 ETS  sectors  National net zero target  
C Sweden  for Sweden’s total 
 tM30 emissions by 2045 
20 ESR 
Net negative 
10 emissions 
after 2045 
0
 
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045
 
 
 
Facts: What is covered by the EU ETS and the ESR sector? 
The EU Emissions Trading System covers emissions of carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and 
perfluorocarbons from combustion installations and energy-intensive sectors (mineral oil refineries, coke 
ovens, the iron and steel industry, the pulp and paper industry and the mining industry). Carbon dioxide 
emissions from aviation in the EEA are also part of the EU ETS.  
 
ESR stands for the Effort Sharing Regulation and includes emissions that are not included in the EU ETS 
(domestic transport (apart from aviation), agriculture, non-road mobile machinery, waste, houses and 
premises, fluorinated greenhouse gases (F-gases), use of solvents, and emissions from industry and energy 
supply facilities not covered by the EU ETS). 
 
2.1.4  A milestone target for domestic transport 
The transport sector currently accounts for almost a third of Sweden’s 
greenhouse gas emissions. However, there are major opportunities to reduce 
emissions in the sector. The Parliament has decided on a separate milestone 
target for domestic transport: 
•  Emissions from domestic transport (excluding domestic aviation, 
which is part of the EU ETS) are to be reduced by at least 70 per 
cent by 2030 compared with 2010. 
2.1.5  Supplementary measures to meet the targets for 2030, 
2040 and 2045 
To achieve the long-term target by 2045 at the latest and the milestone 
targets, supplementary measures may be counted in line with rules decided at 
international level. Supplementary measures primarily include net removals 
Ministry of the Environment  11 (87) 
 
 
 in forest and land, verified emission reductions through investment in other 
countries and bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (bio-CSS). The 
supplementary measures need to increase after 2045 to attain net negative 
emissions.  
2.1.6  Consumption-based emissions 
Sweden’s long-term emissions targets and milestone targets for 2020, 2030 
and 2040 follow the UN’s and the EU’s reporting methods and refer to 
emissions and removals of greenhouse gases within Sweden’s borders, 
known as territorial emissions and removals. Consumption-based emissions 
give additional information to territorial emissions by reflecting the total 
climate impact of the Swedish population, including emissions from goods 
and services produced in other countries and used in Sweden as well as 
emissions arising from travel abroad. Calculations from Statistics Sweden 
(SCB) show that emissions arising as a result of Swedish consumption of 
goods and services amounted to around 90 million tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalents in 2017. Since 2008, consumption-based emissions have 
decreased by around 10 per cent, but they have increased again in the latest 
years.   
 
2.2  Sweden’s Climate Act 
The Climate Act imposes an obligation on current and future governments 
to pursue a policy based on the national climate goals, to regularly report to 
Parliament on developments and to present a Climate Policy action plan 
every four years. Statutory regulation makes it difficult for a government to 
act in a way that counteracts with the climate goals or to pursue a policy that 
is insufficient to attain them. One key starting point for the Climate Act is 
enabling climate policy and budget policy objectives to interact with each 
other.  
Under the Climate Act, the Government is to present a climate report in the 
Budget Bill each year. The report makes it easier to monitor and evaluate the 
combined climate effects of all policy areas and must contain a description 
of emission trends in relation to the targets. The report is also to describe 
the most important decisions made during the year and the effects of these 
on the development of reducing greenhouse gas emissions and have to 
contain an evaluation of whether there is a need for further measures. 
The Climate Act also states that the Government must produce a climate 
policy action plan every four years. The purpose of the action plan is to show 
Ministry of the Environment  12 (87) 
 
 
 how the Government’s combined policy in all relevant expenditure areas as a 
whole is contributing to attaining the milestone targets by 2030 and 2040 
and the long-term emission target by 2045. If the Government finds that the 
targets decided cannot be attained with the current policy instruments, the 
action plan is to contain an account of the reasons for this and the additional 
measures the Government intends to take. The plan is also to contain a 
report on how other decisions and measures, both at national and at 
international level affect Sweden’s ability to attain the climate targets. The 
Government presented the first climate policy action plan in line with the 
Climate Act in December 2019 
 
2.3  A Climate Policy Council 
The Swedish Climate Policy Council began its work in 2018. The Council is a 
cross-sectoral expert body tasked with assisting the Government with an 
independent evaluation of whether the combined policy decided by the 
Government is compatible with the climate targets. The role of the Council 
is based on the complexity of climate policy and the fundamental importance 
of all policy areas taking concerted and integrated responsibility. The Council 
comprises of members with a high level of scientific expertise in the fields of 
climate, climate policy, economics, political science and behavioural science. 
In particular, the Climate Policy Council is to: 
1.  evaluate whether the direction of various relevant policy areas is 
contributing to or counteracting opportunities to attain the climate 
goals, 
2.  shed light on the impacts of decided and proposed policy 
instruments from a broad societal perspective, 
3.  identify policy areas where additional measures are needed, 
4.  analyse how the goals can be attained in a cost-effective manner in 
the short and in the long term, and 
5.  evaluate the knowledge basis and the models on which the 
Government is building its policy. 
 
The Climate Policy Council is to submit a report to the Government by the 
end of March each year containing an assessment of how climate efforts and 
trends in emissions are progressing, an assessment of whether the 
Government’s policy is compatible with the climate goals together with 
other analyses and assessments conducted by the Council.  
 
Ministry of the Environment  13 (87) 
 
 
 In addition, three months after the Government has submitted its climate 
policy action plan in line with the Climate Act, the Council is to submit a 
report to the Government evaluating the action plan. 
 
The Climate Policy Council is also to foster greater discussion about climate 
policy in society. 
 
Ministry of the Environment  14 (87) 
 
 
 3  Sweden’s current conditions 
and emissions 
3.1  National situation 
Sweden’s emissions and removals of greenhouse gases are affected, among 
other things, by factors such as population size, Sweden’s climate, energy 
and transport systems, construction, consumption, industrial structure and 
the economy in general. 
Sweden’s population is just above 10 million and the majority of people live 
in towns and cities. Sweden is the fifth largest country in Europe in terms of 
land area and has a low population density with an average of 25 inhabitants 
per km2. The majority of the population live in the south of the country, and 
the population density varies between the counties from 3 inhabitants per 
km2 in the northernmost county of Norrbotten to 360 inhabitants per km2 in 
the county of Stockholm.  
Sweden’s land area covers approximately 408 000 km2. Productive forest 
land is the dominant land cover type, followed by wetlands, mountains and 
agricultural land. Settlements account for 3 per cent of the total land area 
and inland water systems cover 9 per cent of this area. 
Despite its northern latitudes, much of Sweden has a temperate climate with 
four distinct seasons and mild temperatures throughout the year. The 
northern parts of the country, however, have a sub-arctic climate with long, 
cold, snowy winters. In the period 1961–90 the average temperature in 
January was 0 °C in southernmost Sweden, while the coldest valleys in the 
north registered an average temperature of −17 °C. The highest average 
temperature in July was approximately 17 °C in southern Sweden and just 
over 10 °C in the northern part of the country.  
The average temperature in Sweden has increased considerably in past 
decades. Since 1988, every year apart from 1996 and 2010 has been warmer 
or much warmer than the average for 1961–1990. The increase in Sweden’s 
average temperature is now approaching 2 degrees above pre-industrial 
levels. The equivalent figure for the global average is 1 degree. The much 
higher increase in Sweden’s average temperature is linked to the higher 
temperature rise in the Arctic. 
Ministry of the Environment  15 (87) 
 
 
 Sweden is an open economy in which exports account for almost half of the 
gross national product (GNP). Natural resources, such as forest and iron 
ore, form the basis of Sweden’s industrial production and have, together 
with the technology industry, laid the foundations for a predominantly 
export-oriented economy. The service sector is important, both for the 
industry and in its own right.  
The Swedish energy system is partly based on domestic sources of renewable 
energy, such as hydroelectric power, wind power and biofuel. Moreover, a 
large proportion of energy is dependent on imports, such as nuclear fuel for 
electricity production in nuclear reactors, and fossil fuels, such as oil and 
natural gas, for the transport system. Swedish electricity production is largely 
based on hydroelectric power and nuclear power, but both the installed 
capacity and annual electricity production from wind power are increasing 
steadily, as the use of bioenergy in combined heat and power plants. In 2019, 
hydroelectric power accounted for 39 per cent of total electricity production, 
nuclear power for 39 per cent and wind power for 12 per cent, while 
biofuels and fossil-based production made up the remaining 10 per cent. 
Solar power has increased exponentially in recent years but accounts for only 
0,4 per cent of the electricity production.  
Between 1970 and 2016 the Swedish economy grew by 164 per cent while 
total energy consumption only increased by 29 per cent and final energy 
consumption remained unchanged. For example, the value of industrial 
production almost doubled, but industrial energy consumption dropped by 7 
per cent. The housing and service sector cut its energy consumption, while 
the total heated area in households and commercial and institutional 
premises increased. Overall, the total energy intensity in the economy more 
than halved in this period. 
Emissions from domestic transport are dominated by road traffic emissions. 
Road traffic emitted 15.0 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents in 
2018, accounting for 91 per cent of emissions in the transport sector. Of 
that proportion, cars account for 67 per cent of emissions while heavy goods 
transport makes up 21 per cent. Other emissions come from light goods 
vehicles (10 per cent), buses (1 per cent) and mopeds (0.5 per cent). The 
high emissions from road transport are due to the fact that road traffic is the 
dominant form of transportation and because the vast majority of vehicles 
mainly run on petrol and diesel. According to official statistics, shipping only 
accounts for 4.5 per cent of domestic transport emissions. Rail transport 
accounts for 0.3 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions from domestic 
Ministry of the Environment  16 (87) 
 
 
 transport, and this is declining over time. Domestic aviation stands for 3 per 
cent of emissions from domestic transport.  
 
3.2  Sweden’s greenhouse gas emissions 
and removals  
Sweden has a high gross national product (GNP) per person, a large 
industry, long transport distances and cold winters. However, while these 
factors are generally associated with high greenhouse gas emissions, 
Sweden’s domestic greenhouse gas emissions (also known as territorial 
emissions) are relatively low. Sweden’s territorial emissions are equivalent to 
5.1 tonnes per person (2018), which is lower than the EU’s average of 
approximately 8.8 tonnes per person and the global average of 6.4 tonnes 
per person (2017).  
Emissions of greenhouse gases within Sweden’s borders amounted to 51.8 
million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents in 2018, excluding the land use 
sector. Territorial emissions, excluding the land use sector, have fallen by 27 
per cent between 1990 and 2018, or 1.8 per cent compared to 2017. The 
recently published statistics emphasise that the rate of reduction is not 
sufficient and that there is a need for additional measures to meet the 
national climate goals. Initiatives are needed both to mitigate emissions 
covered by the EU ETS and for the activities covered by the EU ESD/ESR. 
In addition, supplementary measures are needed to attain net zero emissions 
and negative emissions after 2045. Swedish forests and land removes carbon 
dioxide and the total removals remain at a high level and in 2018, net 
removals stood at just under 41 million tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalents. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of the Environment  17 (87) 
 
 
 Figure 3. National greenhouse gas emissions per sector in 1990–2018, millions of tonnes of 
carbon dioxide equivalents 
80 Heating homes and premises
70 Waste
60
Solvents and other product
.q 50 use
e Non-road mobile machinery
O240
C
 t Electricity and district heating
M 30
Agriculture
20
10 Domestic transport
0 Industry
1990 1995 2000 2005 2010 2015
 
 
3.2.1  Historical development of greenhouse gas emissions 
per sector 
Domestic transport 
In 2018, greenhouse gas emissions from domestic transport accounted for 
well under 17 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents, 32 per cent of 
Sweden’s territorial emissions. The transport sector’s emissions increased 
between 1990 and 2007 but has since then seen a decrease over time. Total 
emissions from the sector have fallen by 15 per cent between 1990 and 2018. 
The majority, 92 per cent, of the emissions originates from road traffic, 
while aviation, shipping and rail transport are responsible for a smaller 
proportion. In terms of road transport, cars and heavy goods vehicles 
account for the majority of emissions. The lower emissions level is due to an 
increase in the proportion of biofuels used and the introduction of more 
energy-efficient technology.  
Industry 
In 2018, industrial greenhouse gas emissions accounted for just under 17 
million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents, or 32 per cent of Sweden’s 
total emissions. The highest amounts of emissions come from the iron and 
steel industry (34%), the minerals industry (19%) and refineries (18%). 
Emissions in the industry sector have fallen by 19 per cent since 1990. The 
sectors that have cut emissions the most are the pulp and paper industry (-
59%), by switching from fossil fuels to biofuels and electricity in conjunction 
with a reduction in production, and the food industry (-66%) through 
reduced use of fossil fuels, mainly oil products but also coal and coke. 
Ministry of the Environment  18 (87) 
 
 
 Emissions have increased the most in refineries (+33%) due to a rise in 
production over this period. 
Agriculture 
In 2018, total greenhouse gas emissions from the agricultural sector 
amounted to 6.8 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents, or 13 per cent 
of Sweden’s total greenhouse gas emissions. Emissions from the agricultural 
sector fell by 11 per cent between 1990 and 2018. The most distinct drivers 
behind the trend are a reduction in the number of livestock and a lowered 
usage of mineral fertiliser. 
Electricity and district heating 
In 2018, total greenhouse gas emissions from electricity and district heating 
production amounted to 4.9 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents, 
equating to 9 per cent of total territorial greenhouse gas emissions in 
Sweden. Emissions from electricity and district heating fell by 24 per cent 
between 1990 and 2018. This reduction is mainly due to biofuel and waste 
having been substituted for fossil fuels in electricity and district heating 
production.  
Non-road mobile machinery 
Greenhouse gas emissions from non-road mobile machinery amounted to 
3.1 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents in 2018, equating to 
approximately 6 per cent of Sweden’s territorial emissions. The sector’s 
emissions have risen by 6 per cent since 1990. These emissions come from 
fuel-powered non-road machinery, including tractors diggers, lawnmowers 
and snowmobiles as well as tools such as chainsaws. These are used in a 
variety of sectors such as construction and maintenance of roads, 
households, services, industry, agriculture and forestry. 
Solvents and other product use 
In 2018, greenhouse gas emissions from product use had increased by 190 
per cent since 1990. Emissions amounted to approximately 1.6 million 
tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents in 2018, which equates to 
approximately 3 per cent of Sweden’s territorial emissions. In product use, 
F-gases5 account for 64 per cent of emissions. Emissions of F-gases soared 
up until 2008, as at that point these gases were replacing substances that 
 
5 F-gases is an umbrella term for a group of greenhouse gases that contain fluorine (F). These gases are 
used, e.g. for cooling and freezing and have a much more powerful greenhouse gas effect than carbon 
dioxide.  
Ministry of the Environment  19 (87) 
 
 
 depleted the ozone layer. In recent years, however, these emissions have 
been regulated and have started to decrease.  
Waste 
In 2018, greenhouse gas emissions from waste treatment amounted to 1.3 
million tonnes, equivalent to about 2 per cent of Sweden’s total greenhouse 
gas emissions. Emissions have fallen by about 67 per cent compared with 
1990. Emissions from the waste sector mainly come from landfills and their 
emissions of methane, but also from treating wastewater, from biological 
treatment of solid waste and from non-energy generating waste incineration.  
Heating homes and premises 
Emissions in this sector amounted to 0.9 million tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalents in 2018, accounting for almost 2 per cent of Sweden’s total 
greenhouse gas emissions. Emissions have fallen by 90 per cent since 1990. 
The reduction is mainly due to heating with oil being replaced by district 
heating and heat pumps. This sector covers greenhouse gas emissions from 
own burning of fuels for heating buildings and producing hot water in 
homes and premises, including premises in agriculture and forestry. 
Emissions caused by district heating and electricity used in the sector are not 
covered here but instead included under electricity and district heating 
production.  
The construction and civil engineering sector  
Sweden has a growing population, which brings with it a need for long-term 
housing construction. Increased housing construction opens up 
opportunities to make the transition to more flourishing, climate-smart 
communities. The construction and civil engineering sector accounts for 8 
per cent of Sweden’s territorial emissions of greenhouse gases. This 
construction work has a significant impact on emissions in several other 
sectors (e.g. industry, energy and transport) and in other countries through 
imports of construction products. Sweden’s National Board of Housing, 
Building and Planning reports on a number of environmental indicators for 
the sector with the aim of highlighting and monitoring the environmental 
and climate impact of construction from a lifecycle perspective. Increasing 
the number of lifecycle analyses of the climate impact of newly constructed 
buildings also show that the product and construction production phases 
account for an increasing proportion of the climate impact of buildings. 
Forestry and other land use (LULUCF) 
This sector includes emissions and removals of greenhouse gases from forest 
land, arable land, and other land in line with reporting under the UN Climate 
Ministry of the Environment  20 (87) 
 
 
 Convention. The sector is not included in Sweden’s national targets but is, 
however, included in Sweden’s undertakings under the Kyoto Protocol until 
2020, and from 2021 onwards will be included in Sweden’s commitments to 
the EU for 2030.  
In the period 1990–2018 net removals have increased somewhat to just 
under 42 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents, but uncertainties in 
the data are higher for this sector compared with other emission sectors. The 
size of net removal is mainly affected by annual growth in the forest, 
harvesting volumes and different types of disruption, such as forest fires and 
storms. The Swedish forest demonstrates net growth, which means that 
growth is higher than the amount harvested. 
3.2.2  Measures that have reduced greenhouse gas emissions 
Measures that have affected emission trends have been carried out over a 
long period and in some cases started even before 1990. These include: 
•  expansion of carbon dioxide-free electricity production (hydroelectric 
power and nuclear power, and, more recently, bio-energy and wind 
power),  
•  Expansion of the district heating network and increased use of 
biofuels and waste fuels in district heating production,  
•  a shift from oil-fired boilers in domestic heating to electricity 
including hat-pumps and district heating, 
•  fuel shift in industry, plus  
•  reducing landfill of organic waste. 
 
Industry is affected by the economic cycle, which has had a major impact on 
emissions for particular years and for longer periods in specific sectors.  
3.2.3  Total greenhouse gas emissions by gas 
In 2018, emissions (excluding LULUCF) of carbon dioxide (CO ) of fossil 
2
origin amounted to 41.8 million tonnes, equating to 81 per cent of total 
greenhouse gas emissions calculated as carbon dioxide equivalents. The 
energy sector, including transport, is the largest source of carbon dioxide 
emissions in Sweden. Methane (CH ) emissions amounted to 4.4 million 
4
tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents in 2018, equating to approximately 8 
per cent of total greenhouse gas emissions. Methane emissions mainly come 
from agriculture, landfill and combustion of fossil fuels in the energy sector. 
Total emissions of nitrous oxide (N O) in 2018 amounted to 4.5 million 
2
tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents, equating to approximately 9 per cent 
of total emissions. Emissions of nitrous oxide mainly stem from the 
Ministry of the Environment  21 (87) 
 
 
 agricultural sector. Total emissions of fluorinated greenhouse gases (PFCs, 
HFCs and SF6)6 were 1.1 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents in 
2018, equating to 2 per cent of total emissions. A significant proportion of 
emissions are due to the replacement of ozone-depleting substances with 
fluorinated gases, HFCs. The split between different greenhouse gases has 
remained virtually the same across the entire timeframe from 1990 to 2018. 
 
Figure 4. Total emissions (excluding LULUCF) in 2018 by greenhouse gas, shown as carbon 
dioxide equivalents.  
2%
9%
8%
CO2
CH4
N2O
HFCs, PFCs & SF6
81%
 
3.2.4  Land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF) 
In Sweden there are significant net removals7 in the land use, land use 
change and forestry (LULUCF), below termed the land use sector. In the 
period 1990–2018 net removals amounted to an average of approximately 40 
million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents per year, but major variation is 
seen between the years. Total net removals amounted to just under 42 
million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents in 2018, equivalent to 
approximately 80 per cent of total emissions in all other sectors. The highest 
net removals come from forest land, which is the dominant land category, 
see 
 
Figure 5, and in the carbon pool of living biomass.  
 
In the sector, annual changes in carbon stocks are calculated8 for the 
categories:  
•  forest land,  
 
6 No emissions of NF3 have been found in Sweden. 
7 Removal of carbon dioxide minus emissions of carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxide and methane 
8 The carbon stored in all carbon pools, living biomass, dead organic material, soil carbon and harvested 
wood products.  
Ministry of the Environment  22 (87) 
 
 
 •  arable land,   
•  pasture,  
•  settlements,  
•  wetlands (with peat production),  
•  harvested wood products (HWP), and   
•  other land (only the area is reported).  
 
Figure 5. Distribution of land (proportion of Sweden’s total land area) between the different land 
use categories 
4% 10%
Forest land
Cropland
16% Grassland
Wetland
Settlement
63%
1% 6% Other land
 
 
Source: Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences 
 
The carbon flows for each carbon pool are calculated in each category as 
follows: 
•  living biomass, 
•  dead organic matter,  
•  soil carbon (mineral soil and peatlands), and 
•  harvested wood products (HWP). 
 
The change in the carbon stock (changes in removal and release for all 
carbon pools) is calculated for all categories considered to be managed, in 
other words, not for the unmanaged categories of other land (non-
productive land) or wetlands. The net change per category and total net 
removal is shown below in Figure 6. The total net removal in the land use 
sector has increased between 1990 and 2018. In 1990, net removals 
amounted to 34 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents and in 2017 
net removals amounted to 42 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents. 
   
Ministry of the Environment  23 (87) 
 
 
  
Figure 6. Net emissions and net removals in the land use sector.  
01234567890123456789012345678
99999999990000000000111111111
99999999990000000000000000000
11111111112222222222222222222
10
0
-10
q
e
2
O -20
C
 t
M
-30
-40
-50
Settlements Grassland
Forest land Harvested wood products
Wetland Cropland
Total net emissions and removals Other emissions non human induced
  
Source: Swedish Environmental Protection Agency 
 
The greatest carbon flows are seen in the category forest land, where large 
net amounts of carbon dioxide are removed in both living biomass and 
mineral soil. Significant removal also occurs in the carbon pool of harvested 
wood products (HWP)9. Net emissions, unlike net removals, in the sector 
mainly take place in the categories arable land (apart from 2015), settlements 
and peat production. 
3.2.5  Scenarios for Sweden’s greenhouse gas emissions and 
removals with existing management 
Scenarios indicate that with existing policy instruments, total emissions of 
greenhouse gases will continue to fall before subsequently stabilising after 
2030. In 2050, emissions are estimated to be approximately 36 per cent 
below 1990 levels, see Figure 7. Historic emissions and scenarios by sector 
are presented in Table 2 Historical emissions and removals of greenhouse gases and scenarios per sector 
. Governance needs to be strengthened to 
(millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents)
attain the national climate goals. The climate policy framework, requiring 
 
9 Harvested wood products are calculated as a category under the Climate Convention but are accounted for 
as a carbon pool under the category forest land under the Kyoto Protocol. 
Ministry of the Environment  24 (87) 
 
 
 action plans, reports and audits, seek to ensure that governance develops in 
such a way that the goals are attained. 
The LULUCF sector has contributed to an annual net sink in Sweden in the 
period 1990–2018 and is estimated to continue contributing to a net sink 
during the scenario period. 
Figure 7 Historical emissions and removal of greenhouse gases and scenarios with decided policy 
instruments10 (millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents). 
80
60
40
.q
e 20
2
O
C 0
 tM
-20
-40
-60
0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0
9 9 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4 5
9 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Energy excluding transport Domestic transport
Industrial processes and product use Agriculture
Waste LULUCF
 
Table 2 Historical emissions and removals of greenhouse gases and scenarios per sector 
(millions of tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents) 
  1990  2018  2020  2030  2040  2050  1990– 1990–
2030  2050 
Energy excluding transport  33.3  19.9  19.5  18.5  18.2  17.9  -44%  -46% 
Domestic transport  19.0  16.5  14.8  13.4  13.3  14.2  -30%  -26% 
Industrial processes and  7.6  7.3  7.7  7.3  7.1  7.2  -4%  -6% 
product use 
Agriculture  7.7  6.8  6.7  6.2  6.1  5.9  -19%  -23% 
Waste  3.7  1.2  1.1  0.7  0.6  0.5  -81%  -87% 
Total emissions  71.3  51.8  49.7  46.1  45.3  45.6  -35%  -36% 
LULUCF  34.4  -42.0  -41.4  -40.6  -40.6  -42.2  18%  23% 
 
3.3  Energy 
3.3.1  Overarching energy policy 
The overarching objective of Swedish energy policy is to build on the same 
three fundamental pillars as energy co-operation in the EU, which seeks to 
unite security of supply, competitiveness and sustainable development. 
 
10 Policy instruments to 30 June 2018 
Ministry of the Environment  25 (87) 
 
 
 Energy policy is thus to create conditions for effective and sustainable 
energy consumption and a cost-effective energy supply with low negative 
impact on health, the environment and climate, and ease the transition to an 
ecologically sustainable society.  
Besides the target of net zero emissions of greenhouse gases into the 
atmosphere by 2045, energy policy targets addressing renewable energy and 
energy efficiency have been set. The target for 2040 is 100 per cent 
renewable electricity production. This is a target, not an end date that 
prohibits nuclear power, nor does it mean shutting down nuclear power by 
means of political decisions. In addition, Sweden’s energy consumption is to 
be 50 per cent more efficient by 2030 compared with 2005, expressed in 
terms of energy supplied in relation to gross national product (GNP). 
3.3.2  Renewable energy 
The target of net zero emissions by 2045 demands a major reduction in the 
use of fossil fuels. Sweden already has a high proportion of renewable 
energy, mainly due to favourable conditions for wind and hydroelectric 
power and sizeable biomass assets. The proportion of total energy use made 
up by renewables has increased over time, as can be seen in Figure 8. The 
largest contribution made by renewable energy comes from biofuels, 
followed by hydroelectric power.  
Figure 8 Renewable energy and energy use under the Renewable Energy Directive, 2005–2018, 
TWh 
450
400
350
300
250
h
W
T200
150
100
50
0
Biofuels Hydropower
Wind power Heat pumps
Solar power Total energy use
 
Source: Swedish Energy Agency and Eurostat 
Ministry of the Environment  26 (87) 
 
 
 Today, renewable energy accounts for the largest proportion of energy 
production and only a few per cent is of fossil origin, with remaining 
production originating from nuclear power. Wind power is undergoing 
extensive expansion which is estimated to continue and will make up a 
significant proportion of the future electricity system. In terms of district 
heating production, the transition to renewable energy has come a long way, 
and here the majority of the input fuels are biofuels. Looking at industrial 
energy consumption, the main energy carriers are electricity and biofuel, 
which together account for three-quarters of energy consumption. Extensive 
work towards a fossil-free society is in progress in the industrial sector, see 
section 4.4. For housing, the vast majority of energy consumption comprise 
of electricity and district heating, plus a certain proportion of biofuel in 
single-family dwellings. Direct use of fossil fuels in homes is currently very 
low at only approximately 2 per cent. It is in the transport sector that the 
highest proportion of fossil fuels is found, but this is also the sector in which 
renewable alternatives are showing the highest growth, see Figure 9. The 
increase in the transport sector so far is mainly due to a major increase in 
HVO (Hydrogenated vegetable oil).  
Figure 9 Proportion of renewable energy in domestic transport, 2009–2018, per cent 
30% Biogas
25%
Ethanol
20%
FAME
15%
HVO
10%
5% Renewable
electricity
0%
Calculations based
on Remewable
Energy Directive
 
Source: Swedish Energy Agency 
 
In the transport sector, renewable alternatives are favoured through a 
reduction obligation scheme, which consists of an obligation for suppliers of 
Ministry of the Environment  27 (87) 
 
 
 gasoline and diesel to gradually reduce the climate impact of the delivered 
fuels by blending in more biofuels. Policy instruments such as the electricity 
certificate system, support to research, etc. are other reasons that explain the 
growing proportion of renewable energy in the transport sector. 
3.3.3  Energy efficiency improvements 
Since the 1970s, the trend has moved towards a relative decoupling of 
energy consumption from economic growth and population. Efficiency 
improvements, structural changes in the economy, behavioural changes in 
society and better use of waste energy have countered other factors pushing 
towards a higher energy consumption.  
Figure 10. Index-linked energy consumption, GDP (fixed prices as at 2015) and population 
growth 1980–2018 
250
230
210
GDP
190
0
0
1 = 170
 0 population
8 150
9
1
 x 130
ed total energy
n
I 110 supply
90
total final energy
consumption
70
50
 
Source: Statistics Sweden and the Swedish Energy Agency 
 
In terms of energy consumption in different sectors, the greatest impact 
factor for industry is economic development, while structural changes also 
have an effect. In housing and services, etc. heating and hot water make up a 
large proportion of the sector’s energy consumption. This means that the 
energy requirement varies hugely depending on the outdoor temperature. 
Household finances, fuel prices and demography, i.e. the size and 
composition of the population, are important impact factors for personal 
transport, while business developments and trade with other countries are 
important factors for goods transport. Technological development of 
Ministry of the Environment  28 (87) 
 
 
 vehicles, improving the efficiency of fuel consumption and introducing 
renewable fuels are other factors affecting the transport sector.  
Sweden has many policy instruments and measures to encourage 
improvements in energy efficiency. Sectoral strategies are one such example, 
where the aim is to facilitate a dialogue between the industry and agencies on 
appropriate guiding objectives and measures in each sector to cost-
effectively contribute to the target of 50 per cent more efficient energy 
consumption in 2030. 
3.3.4  Energy markets 
Sweden’s energy markets are largely competitive and increasingly 
international. The price signal, i.e. the economic driver, is an important 
incentive for behaviours and investments that bring greater user flexibility 
and energy efficiency. Pricing is also considerably affected by political 
governance. Carbon pricing forms the basis of Swedish governance in this 
area. There are taxes on fuels, and a charge on nitrogen monoxide emissions. 
Fuel taxation consists of an energy tax, carbon tax and sulphur tax. The taxes 
vary depending on whether the fuel is used for heating or powering a 
vehicle. There are also variations depending on whether the energy carriers 
are used by households, by industry or in the energy conversion sector. 
There is also an energy tax on the use of electricity. Besides energy and 
carbon taxes, Sweden has a number of supplementary national and EU-wide 
instruments and targeted initiatives.  
In many ways, the electricity market is the most important energy market, as 
a large proportion of energy consumption takes the form of electricity 
consumption. The use of electricity is expected to increase as the electricity 
system expands into new sectors and functions, especially the transport 
sector and some industrial processes. Technological development and 
instruments alike mean rising demand for electric vehicles. Electrification of 
the vehicle fleet may also bring about energy efficiency improvements, 
provided that electricity production itself is sufficiently efficient. In industry, 
for example, electrochemical and electrolytic processes are being developed 
to replace the use of fossil fuels and raw materials.  
The most important factor in greater demand flexibility is that it is given a 
value and that this reaches the customer so that they can benefit from using 
their flexibility. There is also a need for a range of smart services, e.g. 
through automation, contracts for customers that want to be flexible, 
offered by actors such as aggregators, energy service companies, electricity 
Ministry of the Environment  29 (87) 
 
 
 companies and electricity trading companies11. In a future electricity system 
with more renewable, variable power and less thermal power production, 
price volatility is likely to increase, providing greater incentives for flexibility 
both on the user and on the production side12. 
Another trend that can be observed is that there is greater awareness and 
commitment from actors in society to play their part in the energy transition.  
 
3.4  Digitalisation 
In 2017, the Government decided on a strategy on how digitalisation policy 
is to contribute towards socially and environmentally sustainable 
development. The overarching objective is for Sweden to be the best in the 
world at using the opportunities offered by digitalisation. To attain this 
overarching objective, five objectives have been set up: digital competence, 
digital security, digital innovation, digital management and digital 
infrastructure.  
Digitalisation offers great potential to further contribute towards innovative 
and effective solutions for the benefit of society in all sectors and can play a 
part in attaining the Swedish climate goals by products being replaced with 
services, certain use intensifying or is becoming easier to reuse or share. 
Digital services can increase resource efficiency, through for example smart 
electricity networks for heating and domestic electricity or for cutting food 
waste. In the transport sector, digitalisation has the potential to contribute to 
cost efficiency improvements, foster changes in behaviour and optimise 
traffic levels, resulting in a reduced environmental and climate footprint.  
3.5  Climate change adaptation 
3.5.1  Strategies, plans and measures to adapt to a changing 
climate 
Significant progress has been made in adapting to climate change in Sweden 
in recent years and awareness of the importance of adapting has increased. 
In March 2018, the Swedish Government adopted the first national climate 
adaptation strategy (Govt. Bill 2017/18:163). The strategy includes 
mechanisms for coordination, follow-up, evaluation and auditing climate 
 
11 Swedish Energy Markets Inspectorate (2016), Åtgärder för ökad efterfrågeflexibilitet i det svenska 
elsystemet, Ei R2016:15 
12 Swedish Energy Agency (2019), 100 procent förnybar el, Delrapport 2 – Scenarier, vägval och utmaningar, 
ER 2019:06 
Ministry of the Environment  30 (87) 
 
 
 adaptation efforts. Drawing on the predicted consequences for society, 
seven particularly urgent areas are identified for continued efforts in 
adapting to climate change. This work should be conducted based on a 
number of guiding principles. The Government’s objective for the 
adaptation of society to a change in climate is to develop a long-term 
sustainable and robust society that actively addresses climate change by 
reducing vulnerabilities and leveraging opportunities.  
As climate adaptation work covers many different areas, it is largely steered 
by existing regulations, frameworks and objectives, both national and 
international. Examples include the 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda 
and the Planning and Building Act (2010:900).  
3.5.2  Create conditions for adapting to climate change – 
collaborative structures, involvement of stakeholders 
and action plans 
The Ministry of the Environment is responsible for coordinating the 
Government’s policy work on climate change. Following up and evaluating 
adaptation to climate change is supported by the National Expert Council 
for Climate Adaptation (Nationella expertrådet för klimatanpassning) and 
the Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (SMHI).  
As a result of the national climate adaptation strategy, in June 2018, the 
Swedish National Board of Housing, Building and Planning (Boverket) was 
tasked with coordinating efforts in the construction industry to adapt to 
climate change.  
In 2012, SMHI was tasked with forming a National Knowledge Centre for 
Climate Change Adaptation to assist municipalities, regions, agencies and 
other stakeholders with their climate adaptation efforts. In 2019 the centre 
had a budget of approximately SEK 20 million.  
Many Swedish agencies have an important role to play in adapting to climate 
change through their respective sectoral responsibilities. They work 
preventively by increasing knowledge and improving resilience. 
Implementation of the national climate adaptation strategy began in June 
2018 with an ordinance in which the Government tasks 32 national agencies 
and the 21 county administrative boards with initiating, supporting and 
following up climate adaptation in their respective area of responsibility, 
including by producing action plans. Several national agencies had already 
ahead of this ordinance drawn up action plans for their sector. Some were 
produced with the support of national funding, e.g. action plans for forestry, 
Ministry of the Environment  31 (87) 
 
 
 people’s health, cultural heritage, sustainable construction and Sami 
businesses and Sami culture.  
The county administrative boards (Länsstyrelser) have responsibility for 
coordinating regional work to adapt to climate change and for supporting 
local actors. In 2014, the county administrative boards adopted regional 
action plans. Work on the measures to adapt to climate change identified in 
these is reported to the Government on an annual basis. The plans cover the 
whole of Sweden with almost 800 proposed measures. The majority of the 
measures concern flood protection, protecting drinking water, protecting 
shorelines, infrastructure (roads and railways), adapting agriculture and 
forestry, resilience in heatwaves and healthcare.  
The national agency network for adaptation is comprised of the 21 county 
administrative boards and 19 national agencies. The network is responsible 
for coordination and knowledge exchange and its secretariat is provided by 
the agency SMHI. There are also thematic networks for national 
collaboration.  
Some local agencies have also developed action plans for their municipality. 
Significant progress has been made, and awareness of the importance of 
adapting to climate change has increased in recent years across the whole of 
society. To encourage further progress, the Government has implemented 
changes to the Planning and Building Act, proposed in the national 
adaptation strategy and adopted by the Parliament in June 2018. These 
amendments have given the municipalities greater opportunities to 
incorporate climate change adaptation aspects in the municipal planning 
process.  
3.5.3  Knowledge transfer and risk assessment 
The Rossby Center at SMHI conducts climate research and has produced 
national and regional climate scenarios up to 2100. A flood portal containing 
information from flood mapping, geographical data in line with the 
ordinance on flood risks and a database of natural disasters is under 
supervision of the Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency. The Swedish 
Geotechnical Institute (SGI) has worked in partnership with seven other 
agencies to produce joint maps of geotechnical risks and tools to assess 
climate risks.  
The climate change adaptation portal provides information on how society 
will be affected by a changing climate, climate adaptation tools and examples 
of climate adaptation measures carried out and information on relevant 
Ministry of the Environment  32 (87) 
 
 
 activities. Many of the sectoral and regional adaptation plans include risk and 
vulnerability analyses.  
3.5.4  Implementation 
The Government finances measures to increase knowledge of the effects of 
a changing climate and to address these effects, e.g. by putting preventive 
measures against landslides, rockfalls and flooding in place.  
The Government also makes decisions on mandates to sectoral agencies 
relating to different measures. However, adapting to climate change is a 
multi-sectoral effort, which means that work is usually carried out in 
collaboration between several actors and sectors at national, regional and 
local level.  
Sweden has a well-established and well-functioning framework for disaster 
risk reduction, including work in civil contingency groups. This work is 
coordinated by the Swedish Civil Contingencies Agency.  
Collaboration is encouraged at all levels and between sectors and actors 
working on land use planning, risk management, natural disasters and 
climate change adaptation to reduce risks and improve preparedness.  
Several collaborative forums are now active in Sweden, where sectoral 
agencies and other stakeholders can share experiences and plan important 
action. These forums include the agency network for coastal erosion, the 
Swedish committee for design flood determination, the delegation for 
landslides and rockfalls, and the national drinking water network.  
Swedish municipalities are tasked with conducting risk and vulnerability 
analyses as part of their readiness to tackle extraordinary events and 
disasters. Such analyses also cover events affected by a changing climate. 
Municipalities can apply for government funding for measures to prevent 
natural disasters. SEK 75 million is earmarked for this each year in the 
period 2017–2020. The grant is administered by the Swedish Civil 
Contingencies Agency at a rate of up to 60 per cent of costs or a maximum 
of 60 per cent of the value of the item under threat. Here, natural disasters 
mainly involve landslides, rockfalls and flooding.  
3.5.5  Evaluation and audit 
The national climate change adaptation strategy has a five-year follow-up 
cycle. The first step is a vulnerability analysis, follow-up and evaluation of 
implementation of the strategy and proposals for auditing the strategy, 
Ministry of the Environment  33 (87) 
 
 
 followed by an updated strategy for 2023. The Government has established a 
national expert group for climate adaptation at SMHI in line with proposals 
in the strategy. The group is responsible for evaluating progress on adapting 
to climate change and presenting proposals for a revised national adaptation 
strategy which will be presented in 2023. 
Ministry of the Environment  34 (87) 
 
 
 4  Action areas and instruments  
 
4.1  Instruments work together to attain 
Sweden’s climate goals 
Sweden uses a number of national and EU-wide policy measures to attain 
the national climate goals. These instruments can be divided into four main 
categories: 
•  economic, e.g. energy and carbon taxes, emissions trading and 
grants such as the Climate leap and subsidies to low emission 
vehicles. 
•  administrative (normative), e.g. the reduction obligation, the 
Planning and Building Act and requirements on carbon dioxide 
emissions from new vehicles 
•  informative, e.g. energy and climate advice 
•  research and market launches, e.g. support for research programmes 
and the Industry Leap’s industrial green investment grants 
programme.  
Since the early 1990s, pricing of emissions has formed the basis of Swedish 
climate policy governance. The carbon tax with exemptions for biofuels and 
the EU Emissions Trading System have been cornerstones of this strategy. 
These broad instruments have been supplemented by targeted sectoral 
initiatives. In addition, the design of societal planning has been of major 
significance for the impact of the governance by providing actors with 
alternatives. The decisions on expanding the district heating network, public 
transport systems and carbon-free energy production have been particularly 
important. Sweden has also long invested in conducting climate and energy-
related research and launching new technologies on the market.  
The instruments in the EU and Sweden cover all sectors of society, and it is 
estimated that the emission target for 2030, as set out in the Climate Policy 
Framework, is within reach but that additional measures and instruments will 
be needed to go all the way. Additional measures are also needed for 
emission targets beyond 2030. The following sections (4.2–4.10) set out the 
action areas in the respective sector together with the existing policy 
instruments of most significance.  
Ministry of the Environment  35 (87) 
 
 
 4.1.1  Fundamental starting points for Sweden’s climate 
instruments 
One starting point when introducing policy instruments in Sweden is that 
they must be as cost-effective as possible. Cost-efficiency means that 
instruments should be general and not promote a particular solution, and 
that they should give all actors the same incentives to reduce their 
environmental footprint. Economic instruments, such as a price on carbon, 
are therefore the most cost-effective in theory. A price on emissions is also 
compatible with the polluter pays principle, a fundamental international 
principle.  
Furthermore, in Sweden’s experience, a combination of instruments can 
improve the feasibility of attaining the goals, with instruments mutually 
supporting each other. Sweden has supplemented carbon pricing with other 
policy instruments for targeted interventions and to tackle related problems 
on the market, such as a lack of knowledge and insufficient technological 
development. Instruments that overlap, on the other hand, have been 
avoided to the greatest possible extent, as this reduces flexibility and can lead 
to higher administrative costs.  
In practice, there are factors that prevent or limit the opportunity to 
introduce certain instruments, e.g. measuring problems, high administrative 
costs or risk of carbon dioxide leakage, i.e. emissions moving geographically 
to countries with weaker climate policy or lower carbon pricing. Practical 
difficulties, unwanted side-effects and conflicts of interest in implementing 
the theoretically most effective governance may also arise. This means that 
what in theory might be the second-best instrument may be the one that is 
the most effective in practice. In addition, it is recognised that policy 
instruments can produce positive and negative side-effects on other societal 
goals, e.g. air quality and energy security, which affects their socio-economic 
effectiveness. Taking a holistic approach to policy and instruments is 
therefore important for identifying appropriate instruments.  
 
4.2  Cross-sectoral, overarching policy 
instruments 
In Sweden, a number of general cross-sectoral policy instruments are 
applied, at national level and at EU level. A description of Sweden’s most 
important overarching instruments is provided below. 
Ministry of the Environment  36 (87) 
 
 
 4.2.1  Energy tax and carbon tax  
The Swedish energy taxation system is based on a combination of a carbon 
tax, an energy tax on fuel and an energy tax on electricity.13 The most 
important taxes that affect greenhouse gas emissions in Sweden are the 
carbon tax and the energy tax on fuels. This is described in general terms 
below and in more detail under the respective sector. 
Carbon tax 
The carbon tax, based on the fossil content of the fuel, was introduced in 
Sweden in 1991 and seeks to reduce carbon dioxide emissions. The tax has 
been increased in several stages since it was first introduced. In total, the tax 
has increased from SEK 0.25 per kg carbon dioxide (1991) to SEK 1.20 per 
kg (2020). The tax rates on different fuels are calculated in proportion to the 
content of fossil carbon in the fuel. Besides specific tax increases decided by 
the Parliament following proposals in government bills, the tax rates are 
increased annually on an index-linked basis pursuant to previously decided 
statutory rules. A carbon tax is not charged on biofuels that are not used as 
part of the reduction obligation for petrol and diesel (see section 4.3.2 Policy 
instruments in the transport sector). Due to the risk of carbon leakage, i.e. 
operations and their emissions moving outside the country’s borders, a 
reduced tax or tax exemptions apply in certain sectors.  
Energy tax 
Sweden has long applied taxes on energy. Energy taxes on petrol and diesel 
were introduced in 1924 and 1937 respectively. An energy tax was imposed 
on fuels used for heating in the 1950s. The purpose of the energy tax was 
initially purely fiscal. In recent years, the aim has also been to steer energy 
consumption in line with Sweden’s goal of energy efficiency and increase in 
renewables14. The energy tax on motor fuels such as petrol and diesel also 
seek to internalise external costs of traffic, such as road wear and noise. The 
energy tax on fuel varies depending on whether it is used as motor fuel or 
for heating. The tax rate for heating fuels also varies between households, 
industries and the energy supply sector. There is also an energy tax on the 
use of electricity. 
 
 
13 Tax on energy is a collective term for duty on fuel and electricity and is regulated by the Act (1994:1776) on 
Excise Duties on Energy.  
14 The energy efficiency target and the renewables target for 2020 are part of Govt. Bill 2008/09:162 and 163. 
Ministry of the Environment  37 (87) 
 
 
 4.2.2  The EU Emissions Trading System  
The EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS) is the EU’s most important 
instrument for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. It was introduced in 2005 
and since then, it has gradually been expanded to cover more sectors and 
greenhouse gases. The amount of emissions permitted in the system is 
limited by a ceiling, which is lowered every year. Approximately half of the 
emission rights are allocated free of charge and the rest are auctioned off. 
There is no free allocation for emissions from electricity production. The 
EU ETS includes emissions of carbon dioxide from combustion installations 
and energy-intensive industry (mineral oil refineries, coke ovens, the iron and 
steel industry, the pulp and paper industry and the minerals industry). The 
system includes approximately 760 Swedish facilities. Since 2012, the system 
has also included emissions from aviation, flights within the EU. For the 
period 2013–2020, emissions in the EU ETS are to be reduced by 21 per 
cent compared with 2005. For the period 2021–2030 the annual linear 
reduction factor will be raised, which means that emissions from the EU 
ETS are to fall by 34 per cent up to 2030 compared with 2005. 
4.2.3  Fossil Free Sweden  
The Government initiative Fossil Free Sweden, launched in 2016, has a clear 
mandate to increase the Government’s dialogue with industry, municipalities, 
other public sector actors and civil society and to create roadmaps to 
eradicate obstacles and facilitate more rapid reductions in emissions. The 
initiative is an important platform for dialogue and cooperation between key 
actors for a competitive climate transition. 
Today the initiative brings together more than 400 actors and is open to 
everyone who signs up to the declaration produced. The actors involved in 
the initiative share the view that the world must become fossil free and that 
Sweden should lead the way in these efforts. In the declaration, the actors 
also undertake to demonstrate tangible measures to mitigate emissions.  
The sector-specific roadmaps are drawn up to highlight commercial 
opportunities for companies and sectors to become fossil free. As of 
October 2020, 22 roadmaps have been submitted to the Government15. The 
roadmaps constitute a good basis for constructive interaction between the 
Government and other actors in society on the path towards the shared 
climate goals. 
 
15 http://fossilfritt-sverige.se/in-english/roadmaps-for-fossil-free-competitiveness/ 
Ministry of the Environment  38 (87) 
 
 
 4.2.4  The Climate Leap (Klimatklivet) 
To further encourage cuts in greenhouse gas emissions, a government co-
funding programme was introduced in 2015 for local climate investments, 
known as the Climate Leap. The investments cover all sectors, apart from 
those included in the EU ETS16, and all types of organisations can apply for 
grants. The selection of the investment granted is based on the estimated 
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions in relation to cost. Examples of 
investments that have been entitled to funding are charging infrastructure 
for electric vehicles, biogas production and processing plants, switching 
from oil to biofuel or district heating, expanding small district heating 
networks and cycling infrastructure.  
To further reduce emissions throughout the Swedish society and contribute 
to a green recovery, the government proposes that Klimatklivet will be 
extended to 2026. Since 2015, this investment support has financed climate 
projects around Sweden that have reduced emissions by a total of 29 million 
tonnes and created more than 4,000 new jobs. The government also 
proposes that an additional SEK 100 million be added to the programme in 
2021 and that the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency is provided 
with the financial framework needed to support larger climate projects. 
4.2.5  Information and increased knowledge  
Swedish agencies have many years of experience of using communication as 
an instrument for the public sector, the business community and citizens. 
Some examples of this: 
The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency website is a hub for statistics and 
facts about emissions that is a popular resource for politicians, the media, 
companies, organisations and researchers.17 
The Swedish Meteorological and Hydrological Institute (SMHI) develops and 
distributes information about changes in weather, water and climate. The 
National Knowledge Centre for Climate Change Adaptation, established by 
SMHI, has launched a Swedish climate change portal with facts and guidance 
on adapting to a warmer climate.18 
 
16 Investments in sectors included in the EU ETS may qualify for grants if these result in greater use of waste 
heat. 
17 http://www.swedishepa.se/ 
18 https://www.smhi.se/en 
Ministry of the Environment  39 (87) 
 
 
 The Swedish Energy Agency is responsible for giving citizens and companies 
information and advice on more effective energy use and is responsible for 
an informative website and support for local energy advisory services (see 
more under Section 4.2.6 “Energy and climate advisory services” below).19  
The Swedish Forest Agency20 and the Swedish Board of Agriculture21 offers e-
services and digital information for forest owners, forestry workers and 
farmers and guidance for mitigation and adaptation measures for forestry 
and agriculture. 
The Swedish Transport Administration is tasked by the Government with using 
information and awareness-raising measures to help to ensure that the 
milestone target for domestic transport is reached and to create the 
preconditions to see Sweden reach net zero emissions by 2045 at the latest.22 
In addition, in January 2020, the Government tasked the Swedish 
Environmental Protection Agency to investigate and account for Sweden's 
possibilities and conditions for the implementation of Article 12 of the Paris 
Agreement. The agency has reported recommendations to the Government 
on how the work on Article 12 can be strengthened and contribute to the 
achievement of national climate goals and which authorities, organizations 
and higher education institutions that play an important role in the 
implementation of Article 12. 
4.2.6  Energy and climate advisory services 
The Swedish Energy Agency allocates government funding to municipalities 
to provide local advice on energy and climate to citizens and small 
businesses. The local climate and energy advisors, a post at almost all 
Swedish municipalities, provide objective and locally adapted information 
and advice on energy efficiency measures, energy consumption and climate-
related questions regarding buildings and households. 
The Swedish Energy Agency also awards funding to 15 regional energy 
offices that coordinate the energy and climate advisors. The energy offices 
initiate and participate in several projects on energy efficiency and renewable 
energy sources, funded by the EU, county administrative boards, regional 
associations and other organisations. The offices work regionally in 
 
19 http://www.energimyndigheten.se/en/ 
20 https://www.skogsstyrelsen.se/ 
21 https://jordbruksverket.se/ 
22 https://www.trafikverket.se/en/startpage/ 
Ministry of the Environment  40 (87) 
 
 
 partnership with companies, county administrative boards, municipalities 
and others, e.g. on plans and strategies. 
Municipalities are entitled to apply for the cost of a part-time (50%) climate 
and energy coach position (SFS 2016:385). The coaches offer targeted 
advisory services to small and medium-sized companies with an annual 
energy consumption below 300 MWh. The coaching seeks to increase energy 
efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Doing this will enable 
companies to benefit from lower costs and boost competitiveness. 
4.2.7  The Environmental Code and the Planning and Building 
Act 
The Environmental Code23 (Miljöbalken), with its overarching goal to 
promote sustainable development, brings together Sweden’s comprehensive 
legislation on the environment. When applying the Code, Sweden’s 
environmental quality objectives, including Reduced Climate Impact (see 
section 2.1.1) are to have a guiding role. The Code includes general rules on 
taking the environment into account that must be observed in all operations 
and measures. It also incorporates requirements to use the best available 
technology. Permits must be obtained for large, environmentally hazardous 
operations. The permit application procedure includes an assessment of 
direct and indirect environmental impacts and energy management and, for 
the facilities that are not included in the EU ETS, it also includes greenhouse 
gas emissions. Emission value requirements for carbon dioxide may not be 
imposed on operations covered by the EU ETS.  
The Government is working on reviewing the environmental permit 
application procedure to make the processes more efficient and less long-
winded, which is important in enabling industry to make the transition, so 
aiding progress in line with the roadmaps produced as part of the Fossil Free 
Sweden initiative. 
Urban planning is governed by the Planning and Building Act24, but several 
measures, such as infrastructure projects, also fall under the Environmental 
Code. The Planning and Building Act requires that environmental and 
climate aspects are taken into consideration in planning.  
 
23 SFS 1998:808 
24 SFS 2010:900 
Ministry of the Environment  41 (87) 
 
 
 4.2.8  Regional climate and energy plans 
The county administrative boards coordinate regional climate and energy 
initiatives and support regional actors, e.g. by gathering and distributing 
information. Regional climate and energy strategies are shaped in partnership 
with other regional and local actors to foster effective measures and find 
synergies. Furthermore, the county administrative boards are involved in 
work on environmental assessments and environmental monitoring, local 
and regional spatial planning, regional development and growth policy, and 
infrastructure planning. 
4.2.9  Grants for market launch, technological development 
and innovation clusters   
Technological development is an instrument designed to initiate a 
transformation of the market and spread new, more efficient technologies 
and methods, such as new products, systems and processes. Network-based 
procurement for developing technology is a methodology that spans the 
entire decision-making process, from pilot study and purchaser group to 
specification of requirements and dissemination, plus further development 
of more energy efficient technologies. It is used in areas such as heating and 
control, ventilation and lighting. The Swedish Energy Agency coordinates 
innovation clusters for homes (BeBo), commercial and public premises 
(BeLok), manufacturers of single-family dwellings (BeSmå), public sector 
bodies that lease premises (HyLok) and food distribution (BeLivs). 
4.2.10  Research and development 
Public financing of climate-related research and development seeks to create 
better underlying conditions for attaining the national climate targets. 
Swedish climate-related research spans a broad spectrum, from the natural 
sciences to the humanities, but with an emphasis on research and 
development in technology and science. The three key areas focused on are 
energy, transport and industry, on which the Government is involved 
through high levels of funding.  
Energy and climate issues are closely linked and the solutions to the 
challenges of climate change are largely energy related. The overarching aim 
of research and innovation in the field of energy in Sweden is to strive 
towards reaching national energy and climate goals. 
 
Ministry of the Environment  42 (87) 
 
 
 4.2.11 Gender Equality and Climate Change 
Sweden's feminist foreign policies, which means to always adopts a gender 
equality approach to international relations, also include specific 
international and regional work. Sweden's domestic policy and foreign policy 
on gender equality are closely linked, as with the EU cooperation. Sweden 
promotes gender equality work within the EU, the UN and other 
international organisations. Work is ongoing nationally to meet the 
international gender equality commitments and obligations, including those 
under the Beijing Platform and the UN’s Convention on the Elimination of 
all Forms of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW).  
The feminist foreign policy is set out in an action plan, which includes 
specific targets for gender equality. Sweden has campaigned for many years 
for gender equality to be integrated into all relevant EU processes with the 
aims to ensure that all women and men have the same power and 
opportunities to shape society and their own lives. At the Government’s 
request, the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency has submitted a 
proposal for further integration of gender equality in the implementation of 
the Paris Agreement.25 
 
4.3  Transport 
4.3.1  Action areas to cut greenhouse gas emissions in the 
transport sector 
Domestic transport accounts for a third of Swedish greenhouse gas 
emissions. Road traffic, mainly cars and heavy goods vehicles, accounts for 
the majority of emissions. Significantly reducing greenhouse gas emissions 
from the transport sector requires initiatives predominantly in three areas:  
- a transport-efficient society,  
- sustainable renewable fuels and infrastructure for alternative fuels including 
electrification, and  
- energy-efficient and climate-smart vehicles and ships.  
The degree of electrification, energy efficiency improvements, the 
proportion of sustainable renewable fuels and traffic development are the 
 
25 http://www.naturvardsverket.se/Miljoarbete-i-samhallet/Miljoarbete-i-Sverige/Regeringsuppdrag/Utveckla-
arbetet-med-jamstalldhetsintegrering/ 
Ministry of the Environment  43 (87) 
 
 
 factors of greatest significance for how greenhouse gas emissions from the 
transport sector will evolve by 2030 and 2045.  
Transport efficiency has several advantages. Measures such as route 
optimisation and coordination of goods transport can cut goods transport 
costs and increase competitiveness in the business community. There are 
also significant gains to be made for taxpayers and society by using the 
transport system more efficiently. Accessibility in cities and towns will 
increase for more groups in society, if e.g. provision of well-adapted and 
usable public transport increases and walking and cycling are made easier.  
For the milestone target for domestic transport by 2030 and the net zero 
target by 2045 to be met, there will also be a need for extensive 
electrification of the transport system and a switch to the use of renewable 
sustainable fuels. Both an extensive electrification and a fast transition to the 
use of renewable sustainable fuels need to take place in the immediate future 
for transport by road and eventually also for transport by sea and air, also 
recognizing that especially ships take a long time to build and have a long life 
span. Over time, competition of renewable sustainable fuels will increase, 
but the need for these fuels will also be affected by the way in which 
electrification and traffic develop over the longer term.  
In a longer perspective road transport should mainly be electrified. This will 
make sustainable renewable fuels available for use in aviation and shipping, 
where electrification is expected to take longer time. 
Transport-efficient society 
In a transport-efficient society, the transports that takes place is as efficient as 
possible from energy, environmental and economic perspectives respectively 
to achieve accessibility, sustainability and competitiveness. Development 
towards a more transport-efficient society therefore means that traffic, and 
thus emissions and other environmental impacts, can be reduced without 
impairing accessibility.  
A more transport-efficient society will be achieved through measures 
including urban planning, access to efficient, punctual and reliable public 
transport, coordinated goods transport, a shift to less energy-intensive means 
of transport and vehicles, higher use of vehicle capacity, greater 
opportunities for longer and heavier trains, greater opportunities for longer 
and heavier trucks where switching to rail and sea is not a realistic option, 
route optimisation, greater use of digital solutions, and innovative local and 
Ministry of the Environment  44 (87) 
 
 
 regional transport and mobility solutions. In some cases, journeys can be 
shortened or replaced entirely. Developing and using technological 
infrastructure for virtual meetings and remote working are additional 
examples of how traffic can be reduced without impairing accessibility.  
A more transport-efficient society demands measures in several sectors and 
by different actors. The location of homes, services and workplaces is 
important, as it affects the distances and transportation between them. A 
large proportion of Sweden’s urban planning, e.g. planning homes, 
businesses and public transport, takes place at local and regional level. 
Creating long-term sustainable and robust structures capable of increasing 
transport efficiency will mean local, regional and national levels will need to 
coordinate their planning processes to a greater extent.  
Densely populated areas offer better opportunities for walking, cycling and 
using public transport instead of travelling by car, while the car will continue 
to be important in sparsely populated areas. On the other hand, rural areas 
have an important role to play in the transition as suppliers of climate-smart 
energy and renewable resources 
Sustainable Renewable fuels 
Gradually increasing the use of biofuels and electricity in the transport sector 
will reduce emissions of greenhouse gases. The extent to which renewable 
fuels are able to contribute to reduced emissions depends on a number of 
aspects: opportunities to produce biofuels that meet sustainability 
requirements at a reasonable cost; how biofuels and electricity distribution 
systems are developed; access to charging infrastructure for electric vehicles, 
and fuel quality requirements for blending biofuels in petrol and diesel for 
use in conventional combustion engines. 
In the longer term, use of renewable fuels in aviation26 and shipping must 
replace the fossil alternatives to a greater extent. This will increase 
competition for renewable fuels in the road sector, while the need for liquid 
renewable fuels in the road sector is expected to fall in the long term as 
electrification takes on a greater role. Sweden has good access to biomass 
and thus the potential to produce biofuels from domestic raw materials. 
Swedish production of biofuels may provide additional added value in the 
 
26 The report Biojet för flyget (Bio-jets for aviation) (SOU 2019:11) was submitted to the Government in March 
2019. The inquiry proposes that a reduction obligation be introduced, requiring blending sustainable biofuels 
in aviation fuel, starting from 2021. According to the proposal, such a reduction obligation is to be introduced 
for fuel suppliers. The biofuels used to meet this obligation must fulfil the sustainability criteria implemented 
in Swedish legislation. The Government is currently preparing the inquiry’s proposals on a reduction 
obligation for aviation fuel.  
Ministry of the Environment  45 (87) 
 
 
 form of fuel security, export of knowledge and technology to other 
countries, effects on employment and regional development.  
Energy efficient and fossil-free vehicles 
Energy-efficient and fossil-free vehicles reduces emissions and the need for 
fossil fuels. Much of the technology required to lower emissions is already 
available, and the range of energy-efficient and fossil-free vehicles is 
increasing at an even faster pace. Today the share of chargeable cars is 30 
percent of the sales of new cars in Sweden, a duplication compared to the 
year before. But the conversion of the vehicle fleet will take time, as it will 
take time to fully phase out the older vehicles.  
4.3.2  Policy instruments in the transport sector  
In the transport sector, Sweden applies a number of different instruments 
adopted at national and EU level. As the range of low-emission vehicles 
largely depends on a market beyond Sweden’s borders, the EU’s governance 
of emission restrictions is crucial. To provide further incentives for energy-
efficient vehicles and renewable sustainable fuels, national policy instruments 
have been introduced in the form of pricing and subsidies. To make 
alternative fuels accessible, certain regulations for the sale of cars is applied. 
Grants are also available to expand the charging infrastructure and for the 
production of alternative fuels.  
In summary, Sweden has implemented instruments in three main action 
areas: (1) a transport-efficient society, (2) sustainable renewable fuels and 
infrastructure for renewable fuels, and (3) energy-efficient and fossil-free 
vehicles. 
Table 3. Summary of the most significant instruments for transport 
Overarching  Transport-efficient  Sustainable  Energy efficient 
instruments  society   renewable fuels  and fossil-free 
vehicles 
Energy and carbon  Urban environment  The Fuel Change –  Emission reduction 
tax  agreements  Emission  targets for new 
Reduction  vehicles (EU) 
Klimatklivet (the  Infrastructure planning 
obligation  
Climate Leap)  Bonus-malus system 
Environment 
Exemption from 
Research and  compensation for rail  Carbon dioxide-
energy and carbon 
development funding  transports  based vehicle tax 
taxes for biofuels 
Procurement rules  Eco-bonus system for  Tax reduction for 
Climate premium 
shipping  eco-friendly cars  
Electrified road 
Tax on air travel  Market introduction 
systems 
(aviation)  support for electric 
busses, electric 
Ministry of the Environment  46 (87) 
 
 
 Planning and Building  Act on the  working machines 
Act  Obligation to  and low emission 
Supply Renewable  heavy trucks.  
EU ETS (aviation) 
Fuels 
 
 
Environmental 
information about 
fuel 
 
Overarching policy instruments in the transport sector 
Energy tax and carbon tax in the transport sector 
Both petrol and diesel are subject to an energy and a carbon tax on fuel used 
for road vehicles, non-road mobile machinery and private vessels and 
aircrafts. The energy and carbon taxes on fuel are adjusted in relation to 
changes in the consumer price index to take inflation into account. Since 
2017 the tax rates for petrol and diesel have also been adjusted to reflect the 
expected development of the GDP27.  
In specific cases, Sweden applies tax exemptions for sustainable biofuels. 
The reduction depends on the type of biofuel and the blend proportion. All 
high-blend sustainable biofuels are exempt from energy tax and carbon tax. 
Low-blend biofuels are instead covered by the reduction obligation system 
(see below). These biofuels are subject to carbon and energy taxes on the 
level of their fossil equivalent.  
The Climate Leap (Klimatklivet) 
The Climate Leap is a cross-sectoral policy instrument, but it is specifically 
important for the transport sector. Important measures supported by this 
instrument are installing charging points for electric vehicles and investing in 
biogas plants. The investment aid programme eases the transition to a fossil-
free vehicle fleet (more information on The Climate Leap is provided in 
section 4.2 on cross-sectoral policy instruments). 
Transport-efficient society 
Urban environment agreements 
Urban environment agreements are a programme for investment in public 
transport, cycling infrastructure and sustainable goods transport solutions in 
urban environments. Municipalities can apply for grants to cover part of the 
infrastructure investment costs. The investment is often combined with 
 
27 This is attained by an increase of 2 percentage points per year, in addition to adjustment in line with 
changes in the consumer price index. However, the total change (increase) in the rates of carbon and energy 
tax is only added to the energy tax (in other words the level of carbon tax is only directly affected by index-
linking in line with changes in the consumer price index). For the years 2021 and 2022 no GDP related 
adjustment of the taxes for petrol and diesel will be made. 
Ministry of the Environment  47 (87) 
 
 
 other measures seeking greater long-term sustainability in urban 
environments or transport systems. These measures may cover greater 
accessibility through public transport, urban planning to encourage more 
cycling and walking, lower vehicle speeds, and parking regulations and 
pricing. Financing has been in place for urban environment agreements since 
2015 and from 2018 onwards has been part of the economic framework for 
developing the transport system, amounting to SEK 1 billion a year in 2018–
2029.  
Long-term infrastructure planning  
In May 2018, the Government decided on a new national plan for transport 
infrastructure in the period 2018–2029 across all modes of transport. The 
Swedish Transport Administration is responsible for long-term planning for 
all modes of transport and is responsible for implementing the plan. 
Planning is conducted in dialogue with municipalities and regions, among 
others.  
Electric roads  
Electric roads are infrastructure for dynamic charging, i.e. charging while in 
motion. Depending on the technologies chosen, electrified roads can be 
used by trucks, buses and cars. Demonstration projects are in progress on 
the E16 motorway outside Sandviken (heavy goods vehicles) and at Arlanda 
airport (heavy goods vehicles and cars). In April 2019, the Swedish 
Transport Administration decided on two further demonstration projects 
that are being set up in Lund (public transport) and on Gotland (heavy 
goods vehicles and public transport). The demonstration project on Gotland 
uses inductive technology, i.e. there is no need for a permanent connection 
from the vehicle, while other demonstration projects are conductive, i.e. a 
physical connection is needed to transfer electricity to the vehicle. At the 
same time, the Swedish Transport Administration is preparing to build the 
first permanent electrified road.  
Electric roads can help to improve the efficiency of goods transport and cut 
greenhouse gas emissions. The Government therefore intends to produce a 
long-term plan for building and expanding electrified roads. Important 
goods routes and links to key ports should be prioritised. The need for 
additional technologies for electrical power outside the electrified road 
network, e.g. rapid charging for heavy goods vehicles, should be taken into 
account in efforts going forward.  
Ministry of the Environment  48 (87) 
 
 
 Eco-bonus system for shipping 
Since 2018, the Government has allocated funding for an eco-bonus system 
to stimulate switching goods traffic from road to sea transport. The purpose 
of the system is to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions from goods transport. 
The Government is budgeting SEK 50 million a year for the system in the 
period up to 2022.  
Tax on air travel 
On 1 April 2018, Sweden introduced a tax on air travel with the aim to help 
reduce the climate impact of aviation28. The tax is designed as a tax on 
commercial flights and is paid for passengers travelling from an airport in 
Sweden. The airline that carries out the flight is liable to the tax. Different 
amounts are to be paid depending on the final destination of the passenger.  
Policy instruments for energy-efficient vehicles and Sustainable 
renewable fuels 
Emission reduction obligation for petrol and diesel (Fuel change)  
An emission reduction obligation on petrol and diesel was introduced on 1 
July 2018 to encourage the use of biofuels. This means that all fuel suppliers 
must reduce greenhouse gas emissions from petrol and diesel by a certain 
percentage each year. This can be done by blending increased proportions of 
biofuels in petrol or diesel over time, see Table 4. The reduction obligation 
makes an important contribution to phasing out fossil fuels in the transport 
system.  
Table 4. Reduction levels 2018–2020 in line with the Act (2017:1201) on reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions by mixing of biofuels in petrol and diesel fuels29. Reduction levels between 2020-
2030 are announced but not formally decided. 
Year   2018   2019   2020   2030* 
Diesel   19.3%   20%   21%   66% 
Petrol   2.6%   2.6%   4.2%   28% 
           
In 2020, the Government announced that the emission reduction levels will 
be gradually increased by 2030, aiming at levels of 28 per cent for petrol and 
66 per cent for diesel by 2030, with a control station in 2022.  
Emission reduction targets for new vehicles 
Manufacturers that sell vehicles in the EU are covered by an EU 
Regulation30 that sets average emission reduction targets for new cars and 
 
28 SFS 2017:1200 
29 Act (2017:1201) on reduction of greenhouse gas emissions by mixing of biofuels in petrol and diesel fuels 
30 No. 443/2009, 333/2014, 510/2011 and 253/2014 
Ministry of the Environment  49 (87) 
 
 
 vans. From 2021, phased in from 2020, the EU fleet-wide average emission 
target for new cars will be 95 g CO2/km and 147g CO /km for new vans. 
2
These requirements have a major impact on emissions in Sweden, as they 
considerably affect the composition of the vehicle fleet.  
Bonus–malus-system for new light vehicles 
A bonus–malus-system has been applied in Sweden since July 2018. Under 
this system, vehicles with low carbon dioxide emissions can qualify for a 
bonus on purchase, while vehicles with high carbon dioxide emissions in 
their first three years have a higher vehicle tax. From year four onwards, the 
ordinary vehicle tax is applied based on carbon dioxide emissions (see 
below). The system covers all new passenger cars and vans. Since 1 January 
2020, the new cars and vans are taxed on WLTP values (Worldwide 
Harmonised Light Vehicle Test Procedure). In general, the WLTP has led to 
higher emission values and thus contributed to make the rules stricter. 
Carbon dioxide-based vehicle tax  
To provide incentives to car buyers to choose cars, vans and caravans with 
low greenhouse gas emissions, Sweden applies a differentiated annual vehicle 
tax based on the vehicle’s carbon dioxide emissions per kilometre. 
Accordingly, vehicles with lower carbon dioxide emissions are taxed lower 
than vehicles with higher emissions. This tax applies to vehicles bought 
before the bonus–malus-system was implemented in July 2018 (see above) 
and will continue to apply to vehicles that “exit” the bonus-malus system 
three years after purchase.  
Tax reduction on eco-friendly company cars  
Company cars account for a large part of new vehicles registered in Sweden, 
and a large proportion of these can be used privately by the employees who 
drive them. The benefit of using a vehicle provided by one’s employer for 
private journeys is, as a rule, taxable, and the value of the benefit is 
calculated according to a particular formula. To encourage the introduction 
of new eco-friendly cars on the market, the taxable value of eco-friendly cars 
is set at a lower level, equivalent to the price of the nearest comparable car 
without environmental technology. For electric cars, plug-in hybrids and cars 
run on gas (apart from liquefied petroleum gas - LPG), the taxable value of 
the company car benefit may be further reduced. From 1 January 2021 the 
further reduction will be abolished. 
Ministry of the Environment  50 (87) 
 
 
 Climate premium 
Regional public transport authorities, municipalities and companies to which 
the regional public transport authorities have outsourced the right to enter 
into agreements on public transport, and traffic companies that are public 
transport operators can apply for an electric bus premium. The premium 
applies to electric buses, charging hybrid buses, trolleybuses and fuel cell 
buses for public transport31. The size of the premium depends on the 
number of passengers and whether the bus is solely powered by electricity or 
if it is a hybrid. The premium seeks to support the introduction of electric 
buses on the market. The budget for the electric bus premium is SEK 80 
million for 2019. 
From 2020 onwards, the electric bus premium will be converted into a 
climate premium. This means that besides electric buses, it will also be 
possible to apply for funding for electric lorries and other eco-friendly 
lorries, as well as non-road mobile machinery powered by electricity, which 
combined with the continuing funding for electric buses seeks to encourage 
the introduction of these vehicles to the market.  
Act on the Obligation to Supply Renewable Fuels32 
To make renewable fuels available, there is legislation in Sweden that 
requires that filling stations with sales of more than 1,500 m3 of petrol or 
diesel must offer at least one renewable fuel.  
4.4  Industry  
4.4.1  Action areas – industry 
Emissions from combustions plants and industrial processes accounted for 
approximately a third of total emissions in Sweden in 2018. A large 
proportion of the direct emissions from industry come from some specific 
energy and carbon dioxide-intensive sectors in what can be termed the 
“basic materials industry”: the iron, steel, minerals, refinery and chemicals 
industry. A number of other industrial sectors have considerably lower 
carbon dioxide emissions. Achieving long-term emissions targets close to 
zero demands several major changes that directly and indirectly affect the 
basic materials industry.  
 
31 SFS 2016:836 
32 Act (2005:1248) on the Obligation to Supply Renewable Fuels 
Ministry of the Environment  51 (87) 
 
 
 The refinery and chemicals industries use high amounts of fossil fuels as raw 
materials for the process, making them relatively difficult to replace. These 
industries need funding and conditions in place to enable them to develop 
bio-based substitutes for fossil-based inputs.  
Solutions to cutting emissions from cement and steel manufacture to zero 
span the entire chain, from raw material to end use. Lowering emissions to 
such an extent means reducing emissions from the basic process itself, 
improving the efficiency of the whole stream from raw material to end use, 
and increasing recycling of material. In rough terms, there are four major 
opportunities to reduce emissions: 
(i)  a transition from fossil raw materials and energy to renewable raw materials 
and energy carriers,  
(ii)  improve the efficiency of the process and increase material efficiency, 
(iii) transition the basic process entirely, e.g. through electrification,  
(iv) introduce technologies for carbon capture and storage (CCS), capable of 
reducing both fuel-related and process-related emissions. 
In the cement industry, a combination of a transition to bioenergy and CCS 
is currently seen as the most realistic alternative for reducing emissions from 
the basic process itself in the long term. CCS technology is also an 
alternative for steel manufacturing if blast furnaces are retained, but there are 
several other feasible solutions here. Looking towards 2035, for example, 
direct reduction of iron ore using hydrogen (produced from renewable 
electricity or bioenergy) is an option. Since 2016, the private initiative 
HYBRIT (Hydrogen Breakthrough Ironmaking Technology) has begun to 
commercialize the concept. Moreover, there are other ways of reducing iron 
ore that have proved to work on a laboratory scale, e.g. electrolysis (known 
as electrowinning), which may also be a solution in the long term.  
Improving process efficiency and downstream efficiency of material flows 
will also be necessary and justified in terms of cost and resource efficiency. 
Increased recycling of material is an important strategy today but can be 
expanded even further. The Government has therefor adopted a national 
strategy for a circular economy that sets out the direction and ambition for a 
long-term and sustainable transition of Swedish society. 
Lowering emissions from the mining industry when mining iron ore also 
requires technological development which can be linked to developments in 
the iron and steel industry. The oxygen in the ore produced by the mining 
industry could be reduced by processing the iron ore at the mine 
Ministry of the Environment  52 (87) 
 
 
 immediately after it has been mined, with the help of renewably produced 
methane or hydrogen, so reducing the need for reducing agents (carbon and 
coke) downstream in steel manufacture. Emissions in the aluminium 
industry and smelting works could be reduced with additional technological 
development. As far as the aluminium industry is concerned, this may 
involve developing what are termed inert anodes that do not give off carbon 
dioxide. 
Reducing emissions in other areas of industry is easier. It is assumed that 
energy consumption for heating premises and for different types of 
industrial heating need (industrial emissions from incineration) could be 
reduced to low levels in all sectors through a combination of energy and 
material efficiency improvements, higher use of renewable fuels, and energy 
carriers such as electricity and hydrogen. 
4.4.2  Policy instruments in industry 
Sweden’s policy instruments in the industry sector incentivise the use of 
renewable energy, improving efficiency and a transition in the basic process 
entirely. There is also certain governance for the introduction of carbon 
capture and storage (CCS). The policy instruments are directed towards large 
and smaller actors alike. Much of Sweden’s industry has signed up to the 
Fossil Free Sweden initiative (see section 4.2.3) and work on the initiative 
serves as an important driving force in the sector. With regards to F-gases, 
governance mainly takes the form of regulation in the EU and at national 
level. 
Table 5. Summary of the most significant instruments for industry 
Renewable energy  Efficiency  Transition the basic  Introduction of CCS 
improvements  process 
EU ETS  EU ETS  EU ETS  Industriklivet (industrial 
investment grants) 
Industriklivet  Energy and carbon  Industriklivet 
(industrial investment  tax  (industrial investment   
grants)  grants) 
Environmental Code 
Energy and carbon   
Energy surveys for 
tax 
companies   
Energy and climate 
Energisteget (energy   
coaches 
efficiency grants for 
Klimatklivet (local  industry)  
investment grants) 
Energy efficiency 
  networks for SMEs 
  Energy and climate 
coaches 
 
Ministry of the Environment  53 (87) 
 
 
  
Below is a description of the most important existing instruments in the 
sector in addition to the EU ETS.  
Carbon tax and energy tax in industry 
Industry has certain energy and carbon tax reductions and exemptions, 
basically as a result of the fact that most of the manufacturing industry is 
already covered by the EU ETS. The manufacturing industry that falls under 
the EU ETS pays 30 per cent of the general energy tax and is entirely 
exempt from carbon tax. The manufacturing industry not included in the 
EU ETS also pays 30 per cent of the energy tax on fuel used in the 
manufacturing process. Previously, this part of industry had significant 
reductions in carbon tax but in recent years, the tax has gradually been 
raised. The tax reduction was removed entirely in 2018 and the full carbon 
tax is now levied. Furthermore, the Swedish Government has announced 
that the energy taxation reduction will be proposed to be abolished as from 
1 January 2022. 
Until 31 July 2019, diesel used in vehicles in the manufacturing process in 
mining industry operations, known as mining diesel, was subject to an energy 
tax and carbon tax levied at 11 per cent and 60 per cent respectively of the 
general tax levels. This reduction in energy and carbon taxes was abolished 
from 1 August 2019. 
The Industry Leap (Industriklivet)  
The Industry Leap is a long-term government programme, that supports the 
development of technology and processes to reduce process-related 
greenhouse gas emissions in the Swedish industry sector. The grant scheme 
initiated in 2018 is planned to run until 2040. Financial support can be given 
to research, preliminary trials, testing, pilot and demonstration projects, 
detailed planning studies and investments in measures to reduce emissions as 
well as for measures that seek to attain negative emissions, for example bio-
energy CCS (BECCS). The target group for this funding is industries with 
process-related emissions as well as universities and research institutions. In 
2020, the Government budgeted SEK 600 million for the programme. In its 
budget bill for 2021 the Government has proposed to extend and broaden 
the scheme. 
One highly significant project part-funded by the Industry Leap is HYBRIT 
(Hydrogen Breakthrough Ironmaking Technology). The companies SSAB, 
LKAB and Vattenfall launched the project with the aim of producing 
Ministry of the Environment  54 (87) 
 
 
 technical solutions to significantly cut carbon emissions from the steel 
industry. During 2018, with financial support from the Industry Leap, work 
started on the construction of a pilot plant for fossil-free steel production in 
Luleå, Sweden. The goal is to have a solution for fossil-free steel by 2035. If 
successful, HYBRIT can reduce Sweden’s CO2 emissions by 10% and 
Finland’s by 7%.  
Energy survey and Energisteget grants   
The Energy Audits Act33 requires that large companies conduct an energy 
audit at least every four years, including information about their total energy 
consumption and proposals for cost-effective measures to improve energy 
efficiency. Companies covered by the Act that have conducted an energy 
audit have an opportunity to apply via the Energisteget programme for 
grants for in-depth planning of measures and for the additional cost of 
energy efficiency investments. Small and medium-sized enterprises are not 
covered by the Act but can apply for financial support for conducting energy 
audits.34 The audit is to cover the energy audit, proposed measures and an 
energy plan.  
Energy and climate coaches for SMEs 
Municipalities can apply for compensation for the cost of a climate and 
energy coach employed at 50 per cent of a full-time post35 who provides 
specific advice to SMEs. See also section 4.2. 
Energy efficiency networks for SMEs 
In 2015, the Swedish Energy Agency launched a network project for small 
and medium-sized enterprises. The energy efficiency networks are regional 
networks of companies where SMEs gain help and support in their work to 
cut energy consumption at their company. The networks consist of 8–16 
companies with energy consumption exceeding one gigawatt hour (GWh). 
Sweden has 40 networks in place with about 300 participating companies. A 
network coordinator appointed by the Swedish Energy Agency leads the 
networks and has an affiliated energy expert providing support and advice. 
Sharing experiences and learning from each other within and across the 
networks are also important success factors. The purpose of the network 
activities is to reduce the energy consumption of participating companies by 
 
33 SFS 2014:266 
34 SFS 2009:1577 
35 SFS 2016:385 
Ministry of the Environment  55 (87) 
 
 
 15 per cent over a four-year period. This enables companies to benefit from 
lowered costs, higher competitiveness and new growth opportunities.  
4.4.3  Directives and provisions regulating emissions of 
fluorinated greenhouse gases 
 
EU Regulation and Swedish Ordinance on fluorinated greenhouse 
gases  
The EU Regulation on fluorinated greenhouse gases (F-gases)36 seeks to cut 
emissions by two-thirds by 2030 compared with 2015. It contains provisions 
on the use, reuse and destruction of F-gases and sets conditions for placing 
on the market specific products and equipment that contain, or whose 
function relies upon, F-gases. Above all, the provisions include a mechanism 
for quantified emission reductions of substances that contain 
hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), with a gradually lowered ceiling for total HFC 
emissions. 
The Swedish Ordinance on fluorinated greenhouse gases37 supplements the 
EU Regulation. The Ordinance sets out specific terms on cooling, air 
conditioning and heat pump equipment to ensure that leakage of F-gases is 
avoided.  
The Industrial Emissions Directive (IED) and Best Available 
Techniques reference documents (BREF) 
Under the Industrial Emissions Directive (IED), in 2016 the EU adopted a 
reference document on best available techniques (BREF) for the non-ferrous 
metals industries. The BAT (best available techniques) conclusions must be 
implemented within four years. These can significantly reduce emissions 
from aluminium production. 
 
4.5  Electricity and district heating 
4.5.1  Action areas – electricity and district heating 
Sweden has a low proportion of fossil fuels in its electricity and heating 
production. The production of district heating has risen by approximately 50 
per cent since 1990. At the same time, emissions from this sector have 
remained relatively stable, as expansion has largely been attained through 
 
36 Regulation (EU) no 517/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
37 SFS 2016:1128 
Ministry of the Environment  56 (87) 
 
 
 higher use of biofuels and wind power, while oil and coal consumption have 
decreased. 
In a long-term perspective, however, since emissions in principle need to 
come down to close to zero, a number of challenges still remain. Two key 
challenges are how peak loads can be handled and how emissions from 
incineration of waste of fossil origin can be reduced. Furthermore, non-fossil 
electricity and biomass will continue to play an important role in substituting 
fossil fuels.  
Phasing out fossil fuels in the transport sector and industry brings 
challenges and opportunities for the energy system 
Greater electrification of the transport sector and industry can lead to a 
higher demand for electricity. Relative to total electricity consumption, 
electrification of the vehicle fleet is not estimated to lead to a major increase 
in Sweden. Complete electrification of the vehicle fleet could lead to an 
estimated increase in demand of 13 TWh38. Depending on charging patterns, 
a higher proportion of electric vehicles can bring both challenges and 
opportunities for the electricity system. On the one hand, it may bring 
challenges if there is a very high demand for power at certain times of the 
day. On the other hand, the fleet of electric vehicles can be a resource for 
the electricity system, helping to even out load over the course of the day, if 
charging is steered towards times of day where this is most beneficial to the 
system as a whole. 
Future changes in energy carrier and the introduction of new technology in 
specific parts of the basic materials industry can have consequences for blast 
furnace gases delivered from the iron and steel industry to local electricity 
and heating producers. The potential electrification of processes in the steel 
industry may result in the disappearance of blast furnace gases, and the 
introduction of more energy-efficient technologies may affect the amount of 
waste heat available. In terms of increased electricity consumption in basic 
industry, the potential electrification of parts of the steel industry could 
mean an increase in electricity consumption of approximately 15–20 TWh, 
while large-scale expansion of CCS could be equivalent to 2–5 TWh39.  
The need for action to cut emissions from incineration of waste of 
fossil origin and for greater resource-efficiency 
 
38 IVA (2016) Framtidens elanvändning – en delrapport (Electricity consumption in the future – an interim 
report) 
39 Ibid. 
Ministry of the Environment  57 (87) 
 
 
 From a systems perspective, waste incineration for electricity and heat 
production is efficient in many respects. Burning waste recovers the energy 
and cuts methane emissions from landfill. The Swedish plants have effective 
waste incineration technology, and Sweden has a well-developed district 
heating network. However, incineration of waste of fossil origin is 
problematic from a climate viewpoint. To combat a trend towards growing 
emissions from waste incineration, there is a need for measures to increase 
material recovery, and for incentives such as product requirements for more 
renewable raw materials in plastics manufacture. Amounts of waste have 
increased in Sweden and studies point towards continued growing amounts 
of waste, making waste prevention measures extremely important. Higher 
resource efficiency and promoting a circular economy is of the utmost 
importance for this reason.  
4.5.2  Policy instruments on electricity and district heating 
Policy instruments on electricity and district heating seek to replace fossil 
fuels with renewables and are geared towards electricity and district heating 
producers, electricity suppliers and other actors. Policy instruments targeting 
district heating producers seek to use price setting to incentivise substitution 
of fossil fuels with renewable alternatives. Price setting occurs both via taxes 
and via the EU ETS.  
The fuels used for electricity production are not subject to price setting via 
taxation. On the other hand, the major electricity producers are covered by 
the EU ETS. The electricity suppliers are also obliged, via an electricity 
certificate system with a quota obligation, to demand renewable electricity 
from the producers. To make it easier to establish renewable energy 
production, measures are also implemented seeking to provide good 
conditions for expanding renewable electricity production, including 
identifying suitable areas for such establishment.  
Policy instruments targeted at other actors seek, through financial support, 
to incentivise the installation of production of renewable electricity that can 
also be distributed on the national grid. The support contributes towards 
encouraging an increase in the total production of renewable electricity and 
the commercial development of new technology. 
 
 
 
Ministry of the Environment  58 (87) 
 
 
 Table 6. Summary of the most significant policy instruments for electricity and district heating 
Substituting fossil fuels with  Production of renewable 
renewables for heat production  electricity 
EU ETS  EU ETS 
Energy and carbon tax  The electricity certificate 
system  
Promoting wind power  
Support for solar energy 
Tax reduction for 
microproduction of 
renewable energy 
 
Below is a description of the most important existing policy instruments in 
the sector in addition to the EU ETS.  
Carbon tax and energy tax for heating and electricity production 
An energy and a carbon tax are applied to fuels used in heat production. 
Most biofuels are exempt from energy and carbon taxes. Fuels used to 
produce heating in combined heat and power plants (CHP) and other heat 
plants within the EU ETS are subject to a 91 per cent carbon tax and full 
energy tax. This is a significant increase for the CHP plants since 1 August 
2019, as these fuels were previously only subject to an 11 per cent carbon tax 
and a 30 per cent energy tax. CHP plants that are not included in the EU 
ETS pay full energy tax and full carbon tax on fuel used to produce heat. 
This too is an increase, as before 1 August 2019, these fuels were subject to 
tax cuts and only paid an energy tax of 30 per cent.  
Fuels used for electricity production are exempt from both the energy and 
the carbon tax, but the use of electricity is generally subject to energy tax.  
The Electricity Certificate System  
An electricity certificate system that seeks to increase the proportion of 
renewable electricity production was introduced in 2003. Sweden and 
Norway have had a joint electricity certificate market with shared targets 
since 2012 and the Riksdag has adopted sub-targets for the system to 2020 
and 2030. The electricity suppliers have a statutory obligation to buy 
electricity certificates equivalent to a specific proportion, or quota, of the 
electricity they supply. The quotas gradually increase year after year. The 
electricity producers are allocated a certificate for each megawatt hour 
(MWh) of renewable electricity they produce. The producers sell the 
certificates on an open market where the price is set by sellers and buyers. 
Ministry of the Environment  59 (87) 
 
 
 The certificates thus produce extra income for producers of renewable 
electricity. As the sub-targets are expected to be achieved in the near future, 
ten years before schedule, a deadline for allocating new electricity certificates 
has been recently introduced and that the electricity certificate system be 
ended by the end of 2035, ten years earlier than what was stated in the 
previous agreement.  
Promoting wind power  
Since 2004, certain land and water areas have been designated areas of 
national interest for wind power. There are more than 300 such areas in 
Sweden, on land and at sea. The total area covered by these national wind 
power interests is approximately 8,000 km2, equivalent to approximately 1.5 
per cent of Sweden’s land area including Swedish waters. 
Since 2018 funding has also been available to municipalities to make it easier 
to build wind farms40. 
Support for solar energy  
A subsidy for installing solar panels was introduced in 2009. The budget for 
these grants is approximately SEK 4.5 billion for the period 2016–2021. All 
types of actors can receive financial support for installing solar panels and 
hybrid solar systems connected to the electricity grid. The investment grants 
help to transform the energy sector and aid commercial development of the 
market for solar energy technology. 
Tax reduction for microproduction of renewable energy 
A tax reduction for households and companies was introduced in 2015 to 
stimulate investment in microproduction of renewable electricity. An income 
tax reduction is granted in relation to the amount of renewable electricity fed 
into the national grid and amounts to a maximum SEK 18,000 per year per 
connection point. 
 
4.6  Households and services 
4.6.1  Action areas – households and services 
Greenhouse gas emissions from heating households and services41 in 
Sweden have plummeted since 1990, mainly due to private heating using 
fossil fuels being replaced with district heating or electricity. Energy and 
 
40 SFS 2017:1338 
41 Refers to heating excluding district heating. 
Ministry of the Environment  60 (87) 
 
 
 carbon taxes, the oil price, the technology available for fossil fuel 
substitution and the expansion of district heating infrastructure have had a 
major impact on this trend. Emissions are equivalent to approximately 2 per 
cent of Sweden’s total greenhouse gas emissions. 
Challenge to build large amounts of housing quickly with climate 
considerations paramount 
Boverket, Sweden’s National Board of Housing, Building and Planning, has 
estimated that there is a need to build over 700,000 homes in the ten-year 
period 2015–2025, which is a very high rate relative to Sweden’s existing 
housing stock. The rapidly increasing need for housing is leading to higher 
pressure on municipalities to rapidly produce a large number of affordable 
homes. There is a certain risk that such an urgent situation will lead to 
solutions in which not every aspect of sustainability is sufficiently addressed 
in planning and construction, and it is thereby important to ensure long-term 
solutions as construction increases. 
Lower energy consumption can contribute towards resource efficiency 
Direct emissions of greenhouse gases from this sector is low and is 
estimated to fall up to 2045. Total energy consumption in homes and 
premises, on the other hand, accounts for a large proportion of Sweden’s 
energy use. Policy instruments targeting energy consumption in homes and 
premises currently mainly tackle emissions in electricity and district heating 
production. The trend in emissions in the electricity and district heating 
sector is also downward, which means that energy efficiency measures in the 
housing sector are making less of an impact in terms of lowering greenhouse 
gas emissions. That said, cost-effective measures to improve the efficiency of 
energy consumption help to lower the costs of climate policy through more 
efficient use of resources. Improved energy efficiency reduces the total need 
for energy and consequently the negative impacts that energy supply has on 
other environmental quality objectives and other objectives of society. 
A large proportion of Sweden’s housing stock is more than 50 years old, and 
the need to renovate estates including the “million programme” 
developments of the 1960s and 1970s is an urgent and demanding task. 
Renovating these buildings offers an opportunity to also improve their 
energy performance. The major challenge in reducing energy consumption in 
the housing sector therefore lies in renovating and improving the energy 
efficiency of existing housing and premises with a lower energy 
performance, with sufficient attention paid to their value as part of Sweden’s 
cultural heritage.  
Ministry of the Environment  61 (87) 
 
 
 Besides measures to reduce energy consumption in existing and new 
buildings, buildings have the potential to become “plus energy” buildings. In 
energy-efficient buildings, more small-scale electricity and heating producers 
will be able to produce heating and electricity to partly cover their own needs 
and sell any surplus to the national grid. 
Improved energy storage opportunities, such as batteries in electric vehicles 
and smart grids will improve the underlying conditions for these “plus 
energy” buildings. Technological developments in renewable energy also 
offer greater opportunities for buildings to become plus energy buildings, 
e.g. through increased efficiency of solar panels or thin film solar panels that 
enable the use of more surfaces for electricity production. 
Emissions in the housing production phase  
The operational phase has long been the focus of emissions in the housing 
sector. However, while emissions from using homes and premises accounts 
for a small proportion of emissions today, the phase in which the buildings 
are produced accounts for approximately 21 per cent of Sweden’s total 
greenhouse gas emissions42. This can include emissions from machinery and 
goods transport during construction, and emissions in producing materials, 
e.g. cement and steel. These emissions do not count as emissions in the 
housing sector and the emissions can arise both inside and outside Sweden’s 
borders. 
4.6.2  Policy instruments on households and services 
Because the sector has largely made the transition to fossil-free, policy 
instruments expected to be of the most importance in the future are focused 
on increasing energy efficiency incentives. This is important, not least to 
make fossil-free energy available to other sectors. Governance uses a 
combination of policy instruments. Regulation imposes minimum 
requirements on producers while pricing in the form of taxes targets 
consumers. Requirements that producers provide product information also 
mean that consumers receive information on the energy efficiency of energy-
related products, increasing opportunities for the consumer to make an 
informed choice. Promotional initiatives, such as training for actors in the 
construction industry, are also carried out to make the market better at 
providing energy-efficient buildings both in the construction phase and the 
usage phase.  
 
42 Boverket (2019) Utsläpp av växthusgaser från bygg- och fastighetssektorn (Greenhouse gas emissions 
from the construction and property sector)  
Ministry of the Environment  62 (87) 
 
 
 Governance on housing and premises is thus geared towards: production of 
energy-efficient buildings and products, users’ choice of buildings and 
energy-related products, users’ energy consumption and improving the 
energy efficiency of the existing housing stock. 
Table 7. Summary of the most significant policy instruments for homes and premises 
Production of  Users’ choice of  Users’ energy  Improving energy efficiency 
energy-efficient  more energy- consumption  of the existing housing stock 
buildings and  efficient buildings 
products  and energy-related 
products 
Ecodesign Directive   Ecodesign Directive   Energy and carbon  Climate and energy advice 
tax 
Energy Labelling  Energy Labelling  Building regulations 
Regulation  Regulation   Energy Declaration 
Training programme for low 
of Buildings Act  
Building regulations  Climate and energy  energy buildings 
advice  Climate and energy 
Training programme  Grants for market launch, 
advice 
for low energy    technological development and 
buildings    innovation clusters  
Grants for market   
launch, technological 
development and 
innovation clusters 
 
Below is a description of the most important existing policy instruments in 
the sector besides carbon and energy taxes, climate and energy advice and 
support for market launch, technology development and innovation clusters 
as described in section 4.2. 
The Energy Labelling Regulation and the Ecodesign Directive 
Energy labelling is compulsory for the product groups regulated under the 
Energy Labelling Regulation and applies across all EU Member States. 
Energy labelling makes the product’s energy consumption visible, making it 
easier for consumers to make energy-smart choices.  
The Ecodesign Directive is intended to improve the environmental 
performance of products throughout their lifecycle. The requirements act as 
a floor for banning and removing the most energy intense products on the 
market. In principle, these rules can be applied to all energy-related products 
(apart from transport) and cover all energy sources. In Sweden, the Directive 
has been implemented by the Ecodesign Act43.  
 
43 SFS 2008:112 
Ministry of the Environment  63 (87) 
 
 
 The construction and civil engineering industry  
The Planning and Building Act (PBL)44 sets requirements for buildings. The 
rules apply to newbuilds and renovation. Boverket’s building regulations 
(BBR)45 contain provisions applying the Planning and Building Act in the 
form of rules on housing design, accessibility and usability, fire protection, 
hygiene, health, the environment, water and waste management, noise 
protection, safety during use and energy management.  
The building regulations include energy efficiency requirements, setting out 
limits for the highest permitted energy consumption in buildings. One 
requirement covers limit values for the energy consumption of the building 
(primary energy factor) expressed as kWh per square metre of floor area per 
year. The requirement covers energy for heating, air conditioning, hot tap 
water and property energy and is stated for normal use of the building. The 
requirements for primary energy factors are currently 90 kWh/m2 for single-
family housing, 85 kWh/m2 for apartment blocks and 80 kWh/m2 for non-
residential premises.  
The milestone target in the environmental objectives system for higher 
resource efficiency in the construction sector means that measures are to be 
taken so that, by 2020 at the latest, at least 70 per cent by weight of non-
hazardous construction and demolition waste is prepared for reuse, recycling 
and other material recovery. 
The Swedish Transport Administration’s experience of setting requirements 
to cut the climate impact of major civil engineering projects has shown how 
public procurement can create incentives for reduction measures, such as 
climate-smart concrete, and scope for new, innovative solutions.  
Support for renovation and energy efficiency improvements 
A grant aimed at encouraging renovation and energy-efficiency 
improvements to rented homes in areas facing socioeconomic challenges 
was introduced in 201646. The renovation grant covers 20 per cent of the 
renovation costs and this proportion of the grant is paid directly to the 
tenant in the form of a rate rebate for seven years. However, in conjunction 
with its decision on the national budget for 2019, the Parliament has decided 
 
44 Planning and Building Act (2010:900) 
45 Boverket’s code of statutes (BFS 2011:6, including amendments up to and including BFS 2018:15) 
46 Ordinance (2016:837) on grants for renovation and energy-efficiency improvements in certain residential 
areas. 
Ministry of the Environment  64 (87) 
 
 
 not to allocate any funding for grants for renovation and energy efficiency 
improvements in certain residential areas in 201947. 
The income tax reduction known as “rotavdraget” was introduced in 2008. 
It is a tax reduction, which means that the taxpayer’s final tax is reduced for 
covered services. The services covered are maintenance, repair, extension 
and rebuilding of e.g. a house or an apartment. Some of the services covered 
also contribute towards more efficient energy consumption. One natural 
effect of the deduction is to create incentives for property owners to carry 
out more renovation work and energy-efficiency improvements. 
Training programme for low energy buildings 
Since 2016, the Swedish Energy Agency, in partnership with other actors, 
has been responsible for a number of capacity expansion programmes in the 
field of low energy buildings. The programmes are especially intended for 
different actors in the construction industry such as architects, engineers, 
clients, technicians, fitters, site managers and teachers of upper secondary 
school construction programmes.  
Energy Declaration of Buildings Act  
Based on the EU’s Energy Performance of Buildings Directive, Sweden has 
implemented the Energy Declaration of Buildings Act48. The Act entails an 
obligation for owners of single-family and multi-family buildings and of 
commercial premises to declare the energy consumption of the buildings and 
certain parameters regarding the indoor climate. The aim is to encourage 
efficient use of energy and a healthy indoor environment by requiring 
owners to learn more about the measures that are cost-effective to 
implement for improved energy performance in buildings.  
 
4.7  Non-road mobile machinery 
4.7.1  Action areas – non-road mobile machinery 
Non-road mobile machinery accounts for approximately 6 per cent of 
Sweden’s greenhouse gas emissions. Non-road mobile machinery used in 
industry, agriculture, forestry and in other sectors of society released 3.1 
million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents in 2018. Emissions from non-
 
47 Owners of single-family dwellings are entitled to a tax reduction for boring and installing geothermal 
heating, and replacing windows, doors and taps, additional insulation, plus fitting and replacing ventilation. 
For individual tenant-owners, only such renovation work carried out in the apartment is eligible for a tax 
rebate (www.skatteverket.se). 
48 SFS 2006:985 
Ministry of the Environment  65 (87) 
 
 
 road mobile machinery are 6 per cent higher than they were in 1990 and 5 
per cent lower than in 2017. Non-road mobile machinery in industry 
accounts for just over a third of emissions from non-road mobile machinery, 
while such machinery in agriculture and forestry combined accounts for 
about a third, with other sectors of society making up the remainder. The 
calculation of emissions from non-road mobile machinery is so far entirely 
model-based. 
Non-road mobile machinery covers a large number of types of machinery in 
different sectors, such as tools, tractors, cranes and diggers, but also smaller 
machines such as lawnmowers. This heterogeneity means that there is wide 
variation in capacity to take measures to reduce emissions. Greenhouse gas 
emissions from non-road mobile machinery amount to approximately 3.5 
million tonnes per year. Unlike emissions from the transport sector, the 
trend in emissions from non-road mobile machinery has increased since 
1990.  
4.7.2  Policy instruments on non-road mobile machinery 
Emissions from non-road mobile machinery are mainly governed by price-
setting in the form of energy and carbon taxes, see section 4.2, and lower 
energy and carbon dioxide tax on biofuels, see section 4.3.2. The reduction 
obligation also has a bearing on emissions from non-road mobile machinery, 
see section 4.3.2. The public sector has additional opportunities to set 
requirements on machinery emissions in public procurement. 
Reduction obligation 
The use of petrol and diesel in non-road mobile machinery is covered by the 
reduction obligation. A higher blend of bio-based fuels makes it possible to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions directly without having to replace each 
piece of machinery. The Swedish Environmental Protection Agency 
calculates that the effect of a reduction obligation of 40 per cent by 2030 
would mean a potential reduction in emissions from non-road mobile 
machinery of up to 1 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalents. Existing 
tax cuts on high-blend biofuels also encourages increased use of biofuels in 
machinery.  
Climate premium 
An introductory grant will be needed to increase the proportion of electrified 
non-road mobile machinery in Sweden. In the 2020 Budget Bill, the 
Government therefore proposed a new premium for electric lorries and 
other eco-friendly lorries, as well as non-road mobile machinery powered by 
Ministry of the Environment  66 (87) 
 
 
 electricity, which, combined with the continuing funding for electric buses, 
seeks to encourage the introduction of these vehicles to the market. 
Procurement requirements 
Environmental requirements on the environmental performance and energy 
consumption of non-road mobile machinery are set at varying levels in 
different public procurements of contracting services. The National Agency 
for Public Procurement is tasked with providing support to actors engaged 
in procurement and to suppliers to develop criteria for environmental 
considerations. The Swedish Transport Administration has worked with the 
three largest municipalities to develop joint requirements49 on the 
environmental performance of non-road mobile machinery and on the 
proportion of renewable fuel use. 
 
4.8  Waste 
4.8.1  Action areas – waste 
The volume of waste has constantly increased in Sweden. In addition, waste 
is imported for treatment and energy recovery. Despite the increasing 
amount of waste, emissions from the sector have fallen considerably, mainly 
in the form of methane emissions from landfill. The factors behind this 
reduction are increased material recovery from landfill and small landfill sites 
of organic material, combined with higher material recovery and waste 
incineration with energy recovery. These measures are a consequence of a 
series of policy instruments at national level and in the EU. Demand for 
waste as fuel for district heating has also had an impact on the switch from 
landfill to incineration.  
Waste incineration for electricity and heating production is effective in many 
respects from a systems perspective, but incineration of waste of fossil origin 
is problematic from a climate aspect, see section 4.5.1. 
To attain the climate goals, resources need to be used effectively and 
emissions from the entire lifecycle of products be taken into account when 
action and policy instruments are developed. The linear economy builds on a 
virgin natural resource being extracted, used and then becoming waste. This 
resource may be of fossil origin and its use thus means net emissions of 
greenhouse gases. For resources that are not of fossil origin, large amounts 
of energy are required – in global terms today, these too are often fossil in 
 
49 Swedish Transport Administration (2018) Environmental requirements for contractors 
Ministry of the Environment  67 (87) 
 
 
 origin – to produce new products from virgin raw materials compared with 
reusing or recovering the energy from the products already created.  
In a circular economy, waste is seen to a greater extent as a resource that can 
be returned to a new phase of production, and fossil inputs are replaced with 
sustainably produced bio raw materials and waste products.   
The transition from a linear to a circular economy demands changing the 
entire value chain, with the development of innovative production methods, 
recovery technologies and circular business models. New goods also need to 
be designed and produced from the very start to enable them to be 
recovered and reintroduced in a circular flow to a greater extent.  
4.8.2  Policy instruments on waste 
Policy instruments in the waste sector seek to reduce methane emissions 
from landfill, increase material recovery and reduce the amount of waste.  
Table 8. Summary of the most significant instruments for waste 
Reduce methane  Increase material  Reduce the amount of 
emissions from  recovery  waste 
landfill 
Ban on combustible  Waste hierarchy in the  Waste hierarchy in the 
and organic waste in  Environmental Code  Environmental Code 
landfill 
Producer responsibility  Landfill tax 
Regulation of 
collection and  Measures for a circular and  Producer responsibility 
management of  resource-efficient 
Municipal waste 
methane from landfill  economy 
planning 
Measures for a circular 
and resource-efficient 
economy 
 
A description of the most important existing policy instruments in the sector 
is provided below. 
Ban on placing combustible and organic material in landfill and collection 
of methane  
In line with the Swedish Landfill Ordinance50, there is a ban on landfilling 
combustible and organic material. The ordinance also regulates the collection 
and management of methane gas from landfill.  
 
50 SFS 2001:512 
Ministry of the Environment  68 (87) 
 
 
 Producer responsibility 
Legislation on producer responsibility contains national targets for recovery, 
and a total of eight product groups51 are covered under a number of 
ordinances. Producer responsibility encourages sorting, collection and 
recycling of waste flows. Producer liability seeks to provide incentives for 
producers and develop more resource-efficient products that are easier to 
recycle and no longer contain environmentally hazardous substances.  
The Government has appointed an inquiry to submit a proposal on 
producer responsibility for textiles. The purpose of producer responsibility is 
to achieve environmental benefit through increased collection of textiles for 
reuse and of textile waste for recycling, primarily for preparation for reuse 
and material recovery. The purpose is also that responsibility for waste 
management and recycling of textiles is to be placed on the producers to 
achieve the polluter pays principle. 
Waste hierarchy in the Environmental Code 
The waste hierarchy in the EU Waste Framework Directive (Directive 
2008/98/EU) sets out an order of priority in legislation and policy in 
Member States. The waste hierarchy is incorporated in Chapter 2 and 
Chapter 15 of the Swedish Environmental Code and means that waste 
prevention measures are to be taken in the first instance. This means policy 
instruments leading to a reduction in amounts of waste, a reduction in the 
amount of hazardous substances in the material and products, and a 
reduction in the negative consequences of the waste that arises. When 
selecting the waste treatment method, the starting point is that preparing for 
re-use is to be the first choice option. The second option is recycling and the 
third is other recovery (including energy recovery). Disposal is the final 
option.  
When applying the waste hierarchy, Member States shall take measures to 
encourage the options that deliver the best overall environmental outcome. 
This may require specific waste streams departing from the hierarchy where 
this is justified by life cycle thinking regarding the overall impacts of the 
generation and management of such waste.  
 
51 Producer responsibility has been developed for packaging, waste paper, end-of-life vehicles, tyres, 
electrical and electronic equipment, batteries, pharmaceuticals and radioactive products. 
Ministry of the Environment  69 (87) 
 
 
 Landfill tax 
A tax on landfilled waste was introduced in 2000.52 This tax has gradually 
been raised and since 2015 has amounted to SEK 500 per tonne of landfilled 
waste. The tax will be index-linked from 2019 onwards. In 2020 the tax is 
SEK 540 per tonne of waste. 
Municipal waste planning 
In line with the Environmental Code, all municipalities must have a waste 
plan that covers all types of waste and steps to manage the waste in a 
manner that is environmentally and resource-efficiently appropriate. The 
waste plan is to include measures to reduce the amount of waste and its 
hazardousness. 
Measures for a circular and resource-efficient economy  
Development towards a circular economy is vital if Sweden is to be the 
world’s first fossil-free welfare nation, and contribute to the environmental 
and climate goals and several of the UN’s Sustainable Development Goals in 
the 2030 Agenda. 
There are major environmental and climate benefits to be gained from 
preventing waste arising and from material recovery. For example, there are 
major energy benefits to be attained from recovering materials rather than 
extracting new ones. For aluminium, the energy gain is as high as 90 per 
cent, which also means environment and climate gains from more energy-
efficient waste management on top of the resource efficiency that is also 
attained. Extending product lifespan to replace new production makes the 
gains even greater. Key areas for the circular economy are to do with how 
material and products are viewed and dealt with to minimise environmental 
impact and extend their value. Production and consumption need to change 
to achieve this. In a circular economy, it is vital that hazardous substances do 
not enter the ecocycle. Non-toxic material is part of the transition to a 
circular economy.  
The Government presented its national strategy for a circular economy 2020 
and will conduct a broad overview of the regulations on recycling and 
managing waste and waste products to encourage innovation and enterprise 
in the circular economy.   
In April 2018, the Government decided to set up a circular economy 
delegation. The aim is to boost the transition to a resource-efficient, circular 
 
52 SFS 1999:673 
Ministry of the Environment  70 (87) 
 
 
 and bio-based economy, nationally and regionally. The tasks of the 
delegation are to provide advice to the Government, identify obstacles and 
act as a catalyst, and to be a knowledge centre and a coordinating force for 
transition. 
If the circular, resource-efficient economy is to achieve its full potential, 
there is also a need for broader and deeper collaboration in the EU. For 
example, common, higher standards on recycling of plastics, textiles and 
batteries in the EU are important for facilitating trade in recyclable materials 
and to be able to control the quality. 
 
4.9  Agriculture  
4.9.1  Action areas – agriculture 
Greenhouse gas emissions from Swedish agriculture have fallen compared 
with 1990, but still account for 13 per cent of Sweden’s emissions. Swedish 
agriculture contributes to emissions of greenhouse gases in the form of 
methane from livestock’s enteric fermentation as well as nitrous oxide and 
methane from agriculture soil and manure management. Other emissions are 
reported elsewhere, i.e. emissions from non-road agricultural machinery (see 
section 4.7.2) building heating (see section 4.6.2), as well as emissions and 
removals of greenhouse gas emissions from agricultural land (see section 
4.10.1). 
In the objectives of the Food Strategy, the Swedish Parliament has decided 
that Swedish food production is to increase. This means that some 
agricultural emissions are likely to remain even after 2045.53 These remaining 
emissions will need to be compensated for with supplementary measures. It 
is nevertheless essential to work to ensure that these remaining emissions are 
as small as possible.  
Agricultural emissions can be reduced by taking action that reduce emissions 
from production, e.g. through manure management measures and more 
efficient nitrogen use in arable farming. The most important action areas are 
described below.  
Methane and nitrous oxide from storing manure 
Actions that can reduce emissions from storing manure are, for example, a 
switch to slurry, acidification of slurry, covering of slurry pits and anaerobic 
 
53 Swedish Board of Agriculture. 2012. Ett klimatvänligt jordbruk 2050. Swedish Board of Agriculture (2018), 
Hur kan den svenska jordbrukssektorn bidra till att vi når det svenska klimatmålet?, Report 2018:1. 
Ministry of the Environment  71 (87) 
 
 
 digestion of animal manure. The latter is estimated to have the greatest 
potential for emission reductions.  
Anaerobic digestion of manure reduces the emissions from storage because 
the methane produced is managed rather than being emitted, and the storage 
of the digested residues produces lower emissions than non-anaerobically 
digested manure. Emissions of nitrous oxide from agricultural land is 
reducing as access to nitrogen increases in digested manure compared with 
non-aerobically digested manure, reducing the need for mineral fertiliser. 
Furthermore, greenhouse gas emissions in other sectors fall if the biogas 
(methane) replaces fossil fuel. 
Nitrous oxide from agricultural land 
Emissions of nitrous oxide from agricultural land can be reduced if fertiliser 
inputs are adapted to the expected nutrient needs, harvest levels of the crops 
and the expected nitrogen delivery of the land. Therefore, measures to 
increase nitrogen effectiveness by optimising fertiliser spreading in terms of 
the amount and time of spreading are important. With precision fertiliser 
spreading, nitrogen can be spread out according to how nitrogen need varies 
over the field instead of providing average inputs.  
Additional measures that have the potential to reduce emissions are the use 
of nitrification inhibitors and incorporating fertiliser in the soil when 
spreading. Anaerobic digestion of manure increases the proportion of plant-
available nitrogen and produces lower nitrous oxide emissions. Rewetting of 
peatlands, which is mainly a measure to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, 
can also reduce nitrous oxide emissions. 
Methane from livestock digestion 
Increased resource-efficiency and higher productivity reduce emissions of 
methane per produced unit. Through better breeding, animal health and 
more effective feed utilisation, Swedish productivity has risen over the years. 
The potential for further productivity increases in Sweden is therefore 
somewhat lower in the years ahead. 
Composition of livestock feed can affect methane release. Feed additives can 
also be used to reduce emissions. However, the potential for this is 
considered to be relatively low. 
4.9.2  Policy instruments in agriculture 
Policy instruments in the agricultural sector seek to improve manure 
management and increase resource efficiency and productivity. Governance 
Ministry of the Environment  72 (87) 
 
 
 takes place in the form of economic support and advice. Several agricultural 
initiatives are co-financed by the EU and Sweden via the Rural Development 
Programme, e.g. investment grants for biogas.  
A description of the most important existing policy instruments in the sector 
is provided below. 
The EU’s Common Agricultural Policy, CAP  
The EU’s Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) seeks to increase productivity 
in the agriculture sector, secure the food supply, stabilise the markets, and 
guarantee farmers a reasonable standard of living and consumers reasonable 
prices. The CAP is divided into two pillars. Pillar I contains direct aid, while 
pillar II comprises rural development programmes in the Member States. 
Pillar I contains cross-compliance and greening payments, where greening is 
linked to measures that could increase the storage of carbon in agricultural 
land.  
Rural Development Programme 2014–2020 
The Rural Development Programme for 2014–2020 covers investment 
support, start-up grants for young entrepreneurs, skills development, 
collaboration and innovation, support for organic farming, land-based 
environment and climate measures and support for animal welfare. Measures 
that particularly contribute to reducing greenhouse gas emissions are those 
targeting increased energy efficiency, production and use of renewable 
energy (including biogas production and establishing multi-annual energy 
crops), switch from fossil fuels to renewable energy sources, improved 
fertiliser management, more effective use of nitrogen, climate and energy 
advice, measures to prevent risks of nitrogen leakage, restoration and 
establishment of wetlands, promotion of set-aside and capture crops in 
arable land, preserving natural grazing and other separate projects related to 
the climate and energy. The programme’s budget amounts to SEK 36 billion 
throughout the programme period, 56 per cent of which is funded by 
Sweden and the remaining 44 per cent by the EU. 
Swedish Rural Network 
The Swedish Rural Network supplements and is funded through Sweden’s 
rural development programme. The network gathers actors at local, regional 
and central level to swap information and experiences. The network is 
intended to reinforce the implementation of EU-related programmes. The 
Swedish Board of Agriculture has been tasked by the Government with 
ensuring that the Swedish Rural Network works. 
Ministry of the Environment  73 (87) 
 
 
 Advice on plant nutrients – “Greppa näringen”  
The Swedish Board of Agriculture offers an advisory service called “Greppa 
näringen” together with the Federation of Swedish Farmers and the county 
administrative boards. The service is funded by the Rural Development 
Programme and since its launch in 2001 has focused on advice for higher 
nutrient effectiveness to reduce nutrient leakage. The service also includes 
advice specifically aimed at cutting emissions of greenhouse gases and energy 
efficiency, because reducing greenhouse gas emissions has become one of 
the main aims of the service. 
Aid for manure gas 54 
Since 2015 there has been a support system for biogas production through 
anaerobic digestion of manure. The funding seeks to increase biogas 
production from manure and thus double the environmental and climate 
benefits through reduced methane emissions from manure and substitution 
of fossil energy. Increased breakdown of manure generates several 
environmental benefits. This reduces both emissions of greenhouse gases 
and eutrophication of fresh and marine water, and produces biogas that can 
be used as energy. The biogas generated can be used to generate electricity 
or heating or be used as fuel for vehicles. The funding amounts to a 
maximum SEK 0.40 per kWh of biogas produced. Between January 2015 
and September 2018, a total of SEK 176 million was distributed between 66 
biogas plants. Funding to investments in new biogas facilities can also be 
granted through the Rural Development Programme. 
 
4.10  Land use, land use change and forestry, 
LULUCF 
4.10.1  Action areas – land use and forestry, LULUCF 
In land use, land use change and forestry, Sweden has net removals, in other 
words removals of carbon dioxide mainly through growth in the forest being 
higher than emissions of carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and methane. Total 
net removals in the sector were just under 42 million tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalents in 2018. The highest removals are seen in living biomass 
on forest land and in 2018, net removals (growth minus harvesting and 
natural breakdown) were just under 36 million tonnes of carbon dioxide 
equivalents. Net removal also takes place in harvested wood products and in 
2018, this amounted to just under 6 million tonnes of carbon dioxide 
 
54 Ordinance (2014:1528) on government funding for biogas production 
Ministry of the Environment  74 (87) 
 
 
 equivalents. The highest net emissions in the sector occur in organogenic 
land and in 2018 this amounted to just under 9 million tonnes of carbon 
dioxide equivalents.   
A larger use of residue-based bioenergy has been crucial in Sweden in order 
to cut the use of fossil fuels in several industries. In the future, the demand 
for bioenergy is expecting to continue to be important so that the emission 
targets can be met. Wood products can also replace fossil-based materials in 
construction, biofuels replacing fossil fuels and biomaterial can replace 
fossil-intensive materials in clothing. The Government’s inquiry on negative 
emissions (M 2018:07) whose mandate includes estimating the technical and 
realisable potential of increasing carbon sinks and proposing incentives to 
increase them submitted its report in January 2020. The Government has 
also appointed an inquiry on forests, looking at revised forms of protection 
and compensation when protecting forest land, and how international 
commitments on biodiversity could be made compatible with a growing 
circular bioeconomy. 
In May 2018, the Government decided on a strategy for Sweden’s National 
Forest Programme. The National Forest Programme will be developed to 
further promote a growing forest industry and sustainable forestry.  
The Government also intends to produce a Swedish bioeconomy strategy 
together with the green industries that contribute towards greater access to 
biomass and employment throughout Sweden and create environmental and 
climate benefit.  
Potential obstacles and uncertainties in increasing removals in the 
sector  
A changing climate brings about both opportunities and obstacles for 
increasing carbon sinks. According to some studies, a warmer climate will 
mean higher forest growth and carbon storage in forest biomass in Sweden. 
On the other hand, natural disasters such as drought, fires, storms and pests 
could become more common in a changed climate, which could result in 
that the previously stored carbon returns into the atmosphere. Therefore, it 
is important to adapt Swedish forests to a fast-changing climate in order to 
harness the potentially positive effects of climate change and counteract the 
potentially negative effects.    
4.10.2  Policy instruments in land use and forestry, LULUCF 
Larger carbon removals, and reduced emissions, can contribute to net 
negative emissions in the long term and, as a supplementary measure, can 
Ministry of the Environment  75 (87) 
 
 
 contribute to attaining the milestone emission targets as set within the 
climate policy framework. At the same time, bio-based fuels and bio-based 
materials that can replace materials based upon fossil raw materials are of 
great value to a society undergoing a climate transition. Sweden is well placed 
to combine active forestry with high environmental requirements as well as 
maintaining a significant carbon sink.  
The Swedish Forestry Act has two overarching objectives: production and 
protection of the environment. The production objective means that forests 
and forest land must be used efficiently and responsibly so that they deliver a 
sustainable profit. The focus is that flexibility is to be given in terms of what 
the forests produce and how it is used. The environmental objective means 
that the natural productive capacity of forest land must be preserved. 
Biodiversity and the genetic diversity in the forests must be safeguarded. 
Forests must be managed in a way that enables naturally occurring plant and 
animal species to survive in natural conditions and populations that enable 
them to thrive. Endangered species and habitats as well as heritage forests 
and their aesthetic and societal values must be protected. 
Applicable legislation affects indirectly the development of removals or 
emissions of carbon dioxide in different ways, mainly through provisions on 
forest management in the Forestry Act, provisions on land drainage in the 
Environmental Code and protection of areas and nature conservation 
agreements. A description of the most important existing policy instruments 
in the sector is provided below. 
Under the Forestry Act, forest owners have freedom and responsibility for 
long-term sustainable forest management. The regulations cover obligation 
to report planned harvesting, minimum age for harvesting, regeneration 
requirements, thinning guidelines, provisions for consideration to soil, 
biodiversity, water and measures to limit forest damage. Examples of 
provisions on nature conservation and cultural heritage include not 
disturbing important biotopes, buffer zones and arable land, and leaving 
gatherings of old trees and dead wood in place. The forestry Act is also 
applicable for continuous cover forest management. Special rules apply to 
certain types of forest such as mountain forests and deciduous forests as well 
as reindeer herding areas. 
Rewetting of drained wetlands 
In 2021, a new scheme will be established in order to rewet previously 
drained wetlands and thereby reduce greenhouse gas emissions while 
Ministry of the Environment  76 (87) 
 
 
 contributing to other significant environmental goals such as preserving 
biodiversity. 
Rules on land drainage, Environmental Code, Chapter 11 
The Environmental Code contains rules on land drainage which implies that 
oxygenation of organogenic land by drainage is prevented. Land drainage is a 
measure carried out by removing water or protecting land from flooding. In 
order for land drainage to be acceptable in the sense of the Environmental 
Code, the purpose of the measures must be to increase the long-term 
suitability of the land for a particular purpose, such as cultivation, 
construction, peatland, road construction or golf courses.  
Since 1986, a permit is required for land drainage under the Environmental 
Code. In line with Chapter 11, section 14, the Government may prohibit 
land drainage in areas where the conservation of wetlands is particularly 
desirable. The provision further states that the county administrative boards 
may grant exemptions from such prohibitions. The Government has used its 
authorisation by pointing out areas where a ban on land drainage applies in 
Ordinance (1998:1388) on water operations. For land drainage to be able to 
be permitted in such an area, the county administrative board must find that 
the conditions for the dispensation are met, and the permit must be applied 
for and granted.  
Nature reserves55, Chapter 7 of the Environmental Code 
In Sweden and in many other countries, nature reserves are one of the most 
common ways of protecting valuable natural environments. There are 
currently almost 5,000 nature reserves in Sweden, covering a total area of 
4,808,590 hectares (2018). Chapter 7 of the Environmental Code contains 
the regulations for setting up nature reserves. Work to set up nature reserves 
is headed by the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency.  
Nature conservation agreements 
Nature conservation agreements56 are agreements in civil law. The property 
owner and the State or a municipality agree on a certain amount of financial 
compensation for the property owner in return for the owner not carrying 
out forestry, for example. The Swedish Forest Agency and the Swedish 
Environmental Protection Agency together provide guidance.  
 
 
55 http://www.swedishepa.seEnjoying-nature/Protected-areas/Nature-reserve/ 
56 http://www.naturvardsverket.se/Stod-i-miljoarbetet/Vagledningar/Skyddad-natur/Naturvardsavtal/ 
Ministry of the Environment  77 (87) 
 
 
 Sweden’s National Forest Programme  
The strategy for Sweden’s National Forest Programme was decided by the 
Government on 17 May 2018. Further work within the National Forest 
Programme’s strategy is guided by the programme’s vision: “Forests – our 
‘green gold’ – will contribute to creating jobs and sustainable growth 
throughout the country, and to the development of a growing 
bioeconomy.” An action plan has been drawn up for the strategy containing 
concrete measures based on the Forest Programme’s vision and 
objectives. Access to sustainable biomass from Swedish forests has an 
important role to play in the ongoing transition to a fossil-free society. The 
action plan contributes to Sweden’s climate efforts by setting goals and 
measures aimed at increasing national access to bio-based alternatives.  
Advice and training on forest management 
The Swedish Forest Agency provides information and guidance to forest 
owners on adaptation and mitigation measures. The Swedish Forest Agency 
also provides tools and guidance on how best to manage and administer 
their forests with the owner’s specific objectives in mind. 
The EU’s Common Agricultural Policy, CAP  
One important policy instrument influencing production in the agricultural 
sector, and emissions and removal of greenhouse gases from the agricultural 
sector and its land use, is the EU’s Common Agricultural Policy, CAP. The 
CAP also applies to the LULUCF sector, as emissions and removals of 
greenhouse gases on arable land and pasture are allocated to this sector. 
Read more about the CAP in section 4.9.2 on policy instruments in 
agriculture. 
Ministry of the Environment  78 (87) 
 
 
 5  Consequences of Sweden’s 
goals and actions 
 
5.1  Consequences of failing to meet the 
climate targets 
An important number of reports have shown that the costs of climate 
change to society can be substantial. Several reports, including the Stern 
Review, state that if we do not act preventively, the long-term total costs and 
risks of climate change will be equivalent to a significant loss of global GDP 
per year for a long time to come. Moreover, the Stern Review estimates that 
the costs of not taking action widely exceed the costs of acting. The World 
Economic Forum judges that failure of climate-change mitigation and 
adaptation as well as extreme weather events are the two greatest and most 
likely risks to the global economy57.  
Temperature is estimated to rise twice as rapidly in Sweden compared to the 
global average, which could bring, for example58: 
Positive impacts such as a longer growing season, lower heating costs and higher 
hydroelectric power potential. 
Negative impacts such as higher death rates due to heatwaves, greater spread of 
infectious diseases, shorter snow seasons, higher risks for flooding, landslides, rockfalls 
and erosion, lower quality drinking water and a higher risk of drought, forest fires and 
insect infestation.  
The summer weather of 2018 – with high temperatures over a long period, 
severe drought, low drinking water levels and insect damage to trees – can be 
seen as an illustration of Sweden’s vulnerability even now.  
In general, other regions in the world are expected to be harder hit by the 
effects of climate change than Sweden. However, with an open economy, 
Sweden is vulnerable to indirect impacts when other countries suffer storms, 
fires and floods, etc. The effects may include increased migration, a higher 
 
57 http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Global_Risks_Report_2019.pdf  
58 https://www.regeringen.se/49bbac/contentassets/94b5ab7c66604cd0b8842fd6510b42c9/sverige-infor-
klimatforandringarna---hot-och-mojligheter-missiv-kapitel-1-3-sou-200760  
Ministry of the Environment  79 (87) 
 
 
 risk of violent conflict, impaired food supply and a need for more extensive 
work on combatting poverty59.   
These effects may also be considerably greater if certain irrevocable 
thresholds in the climate system are passed. For example, this would involve 
a serious rise in sea level following the collapse of the West Antarctic ice 
cover, high methane emissions from melting of the permafrost or major 
regional temperature changes from the stopping of the Gulf Stream. Effects 
of such events are very hard to predict.  
 
5.2  Consequences of Swedish policy to 
attain the climate goals 
5.2.1  The costs of transition are estimated to be small but 
uncertain 
The total costs for Sweden of reaching net zero emissions by 2045 at the 
latest are estimated by today’s models, both in Swedish and international 
studies, to be minor: only a few percentage points of GDP, either positively 
or negatively60. However, there are considerable uncertainties in forecasts 
reaching over 25 years in the future. There are examples of previous future 
forecasts, both in the field of economics and in the field of energy, that were 
no longer relevant only a few years after they were published. This is due to 
large uncertainties in many modelling assumptions, such as discounting rates, 
economic growth, behavioural change or technical development.  
In addition, GDP is an incomplete measurement of prosperity, so the 
models currently used are limited in their scope. Both the IPCC and The 
New Climate Economy therefore emphasise the value of a multi criteria 
decision analysis, i.e. strategies that are favourable for the climate and several 
other goals of society at the same time.  
5.2.2  Synergies and conflicts with other environmental and 
societal goals  
The total number of potential synergies between cutting emissions and other 
goals of society generally exceeds the number of conflicts, but the net impact 
depends on the policy pursued in practice and the rate and size of the 
 
59 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/2018/02/ar5_wgII_spm_en.pdf  
60 http://www.sou.gov.se/wp-content/uploads/2016/03/SOU_2016_21_webb.pdf 
General equilibrium models usually show higher costs than energy system models.  
Ministry of the Environment  80 (87) 
 
 
 change61. Favouring synergies and reducing conflicts between emission 
reductions and other societal goals reduces the cost of a broader transition 
towards sustainable development.  
These side-effects are often difficult to quantify but can be very significant. 
Energy efficiency improvements and electrification of cars as well as a 
greater use of public transport, cycling and walking can for example lead to a 
better urban environment and lower particle emissions, whose health effects 
are estimated to claim 7,600 lives every year and cost about 1.2 per cent of 
Sweden’s GNP62. More physical exercise can also reduce the risk for 
premature death, cardiovascular disease and type 2 diabetes63. Cutting down 
on red meat and charcuterie products is also considered to reduce the risk of 
a number of cases of cancer64.  
Biomass harvests need to be done in a way that is compatible with efforts to 
attain other environmental and social goals and with attention paid to the 
consequences for carbon sinks over time. Therefore, the bioeconomy needs 
to be based on effective use of resources, where the resource of the forests 
can be used to the full within the sustainability parameters set by other 
environmental and societal goals while retaining or improving the long-term 
carbon sink in the forest over time. 
In the transition, it is also important to take into account distributional and 
regional effects, as different households have different opportunities to 
adapt to new instruments. Other sustainability aspects such as increasing 
gender equality and social cohesion can help to encourage reducing 
emissions65.  
5.2.3  Risks and opportunities of the transition for industry 
If policy instruments are only unilaterally introduced in Sweden, there is a 
risk of job losses, for example, in carbon-intensive industries and sectors that 
operate on an international market. In such cases, there would be a risk of 
carbon leakage, i.e. the policy pursued resulting in emissions occurring in 
 
61 https://www.ipcc.ch/site/assets/uploads/sites/2/2019/05/SR15_SPM_version_report_LR.pdf  
62 
https://www.ivl.se/download/18.2aa26978160972788071cafe/1529073450199/C317%20Quantification%20of%
20population%20exposure%202015.pdf 
63 http://gih.diva-portal.org/smash/get/diva2:849879/FULLTEXT03.pdf  
64 https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/278948/WHO-NMH-NHD-18.12-eng.pdf?ua=1  
65 https://www.naturvardsverket.se/Documents/publikationer6400/978-91-620-6458-7.pdf 
Ministry of the Environment  81 (87) 
 
 
 other countries instead. Such a development would run counter to the 
generational goal adopted by the Parliament66.  
Major technological leaps are needed to enable the most carbon-intensive 
industry in Sweden to make the transition, and here it is important that risks 
are shared between the business community and the Government.  
Transitioning the Swedish economy to net zero emissions by 2045 means 
that parts of the economy that are strongly dependent on fossil fuels, or 
otherwise give rise to major greenhouse gas emissions, will be affected more 
than the sectors that are not as emission-intensive. For example, basic 
industry, heavy goods transport and the agricultural sector may be 
particularly vulnerable in the transition, at least in the short term.  
The long-term rules that form part of the climate policy framework as well 
as industries’ own roadmaps within the Fossil Free Sweden initiative create 
predictability and opportunities for the financial sector to make long-term 
investments in new technology and new services, and refrain from 
investments in potentially stranded or depreciated fossil assets.  
A certain degree of flexibility is also important when designing climate 
policy, such that policies can be adapted to prevailing circumstances and 
encourage cost-efficiency. This is achieved by not setting milestone targets 
and emission paths for sectors and sub-sectors at an overly detailed level, 
and by allowing the use of supplementary measures in meeting the targets.  
However, the starting point for Sweden’s climate strategy is that the rest of 
the world, including the EU, acts forcefully to keep the average global 
temperature rise to far below two degrees and aim for 1.5 degrees, in line 
with the Paris Agreement. In this transition, more than 400 organisations 
and 22 sectors are part of the Fossil Free Sweden initiative.67  
This can be explained by the fact that Sweden has certain comparative 
advantages in the climate transition seen from an international perspective 
due to an almost fossil-free electricity and district heating production, 
biomass, water and wind resources, high climate awareness, a high trust in 
institutions and a long history of innovation and entrepreneurship. 
 
66 The generational goal reads: “The overall goal of Swedish environmental policy is to hand over to the next 
generation a society in which the major environmental problems in Sweden have been solved, without 
increasing environmental and health problems outside Sweden’s borders.” 
67 http://fossilfritt-sverige.se/in-english/roadmaps-for-fossil-free-competitiveness/  
Ministry of the Environment  82 (87) 
 
 
 6  Buy-in and realisation – 
Sweden’s path to goals and 
measures 
When the decision on the climate policy framework was reached, it was 
emphasised that Sweden has a strong tradition of political agreements on 
issues that are important and fundamental to society. A long-term climate 
policy that has broad support across party boundaries and in the Parliament 
is needed if Sweden is to lead the way on a global climate transition.68 It is 
also central to Sweden’s strategy to involve broad groups when 
implementing the policy, and that different actors in society are given every 
opportunity to include climate aspects in the strategic planning of their 
operations.  
The Swedish climate goals adopted in 2017 are the result of long-term 
efforts and part of the overarching objective of Swedish environmental 
policy. In 1999 the Swedish Parliament decided on a generational goal that 
sets out the direction of the transformation of society that needs to take 
place within a generation. The overarching objective of Swedish 
environmental policy is to hand over to the next generation a society in 
which the major environmental problems in Sweden have been solved, 
without increasing environmental and health problems outside Sweden’s 
borders. This generational goal is linked to 16 environmental quality 
objectives, including Reduced Climate Impact, which states that in 
accordance with the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change 
(UNFCCC), concentrations of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere must be 
stabilised at a level that will prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference 
with the climate system. 
Since 1999, the Swedish climate goals have been updated and developed 
further. The climate policy decisions of 2002 and 2009 adopted national 
goals that were more ambitious than Sweden’s commitments under the first 
and second commitment periods of the Kyoto Protocol and in line with the 
EU’s effort sharing decision (ESD).  
In 2010, the Swedish Government appointed a parliamentary committee, the 
Cross-Party Committee on Environmental Objectives, tasked with proposing how 
Sweden’s environmental quality objectives and the generational goal could 
 
68 Government Bill 2016/17:146, A climate policy framework for Sweden 
Ministry of the Environment  83 (87) 
 
 
 be attained. In December 2014, the Cross-Party Committee on 
Environmental Objectives received a specific mandate from the 
Government, which firstly resulted in the climate policy framework and a 
long-term target for 2045, and secondly a proposal for a long-term climate 
and air quality strategy including the milestone targets for 2030 and 2040. 
The work of the committee was conducted in close cooperation with public 
and private actors. Thirty experts in different categories were assigned to the 
Committee: government agencies, business representatives, researchers, 
environmental organisations and unions. Central issues discussed in this 
context were the level of ambition and the timing set for the long-term 
target. At these meetings, representatives of research and environmental 
organisations asserted the importance of the target being net zero and that 
this needed to happen within a short timeframe to be in line with the IPCC’s 
conclusions. Furthermore, the experts had opportunities to react to 
assumptions of the potential of the measures made in the scenarios that were 
part of the basis for producing the levels in the milestone targets for 2030 
and 2040 (see annex 1 “Modelling”).  
Two reference groups were also attached to the Cross-Party Committee on 
Environmental Objectives, one with expertise in political science and law 
and one with expertise in climate economics. Moreover, six external dialogue 
groups were appointed with leading representatives from academia, the 
business community and civil society to discuss the development of areas 
identified as central to climate policy. The dialogue groups together 
presented what the challenges of the sectors looked like, the opportunities 
for action and the governance needed. The text constituted part of the 
underlying data for the climate and air strategy.  
Once the mandate of the Cross-Party Committee on Environmental 
Objectives had been fulfilled and its report submitted to the Government, 
the proposal on a climate policy framework and a long-term target for 2045 
was circulated to approximately 200 consultation bodies for comment over a 
three-month period69. A similar consultation procedure was also carried out 
for the long-term climate and air quality strategy70. The consultation bodies 
included voluntary organisations (NGOs), industry organisations, think 
tanks, universities and higher education institutions and government 
 
69 https://www.regeringen.se/remisser/2016/03/remiss-av-delbetankande-fran-miljomalsberedningen-med-
forslag-om-ett-klimatpolitiskt-ramverk-inklusive-langsiktigt-klimatmal/ 
70 https://www.regeringen.se/remisser/2016/06/remiss-av-delbetankande-fran-miljomalsberedningen-med-forslag-om-
en-klimat--och-luftvardsstrategi-for-sverige/  
Ministry of the Environment  84 (87) 
 
 
 agencies. The consultations showed that there was largely broad-based 
support for the climate policy framework and the climate goals. 
Seven out of eight political parties with more than 85 per cent of the votes in 
the Parliament supported the new goals of the climate policy and the 
framework when these were decided in June 2017. Since then, a Climate 
Policy Council has been set up and submits its annual reports to the 
Government. Audits of the Government’s climate efforts have been 
presented each year. The Government presented its first climate policy 
action plan in line with the Climate Act in December 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ministry of the Environment  85 (87) 
 
 
 Annex 1 Modelling 
Results from scenario analyses were used as part of the underlying material 
for discussion in producing the milestone targets for 2030 and 2040 for the 
non-trading sector, and for the long-term target of net zero emissions. The 
underlying data from the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency in 
2012, in which five agencies worked together, formed the main basis of the 
scenarios. In line with this Government mandate, the agencies produced 
scenarios for different sectors to attain net zero emissions by 2050. The 
participating agencies were the Swedish Environmental Protection Agency, 
the Swedish Energy Agency, the Swedish Board of Agriculture, the Swedish 
Forest Agency and the Swedish Transport Administration. Universities and 
an energy system modelling consultant were hired to produce parts of the 
data for the scenarios. In this context, a “bottom-up” method was used in 
which potential measures in the respective sector were identified. 
Calculations of how high cuts in emissions the respective measure was 
capable of contributing and expert assessments on when these measures 
might be able to be put in place were combined and described in scenarios. 
 
Figure 1. Results of the target scenario work underlying the discussion on target levels for 2030, 2040 and 2045. 
80
70
Transportation
.q 60
e Households and services
2
O 50
Agriculture
C
 se 40 Waste
n
n 30 Non-road mobile machinery
o
tM 20 Other sectors
Industry
10
Energy production
0
0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 5
9 9 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3 4 4
9 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2  
 
 
The scenarios from the mandate in 2012 were developed further and 
updated in conjunction with the negotiations of the Cross-Party Committee 
on Environmental Objectives, see Figure 1. The starting point was 
assessments from research, environmental organisations and government 
agencies on the need for rapid action, together with different aspects of technical 
Ministry of the Environment  86 (87) 
 
 
 feasibility. Scenarios and proposed target levels were discussed in the Cross-Party 
Committee on Environmental Objectives.  
One important basis for the work on scenarios was the knowledge Sweden has on 
greenhouse gas emissions in the country and the scenarios that were constantly 
produced to evaluate emissions looking ahead in time with existing governance.  
To supplement the work on scenarios, the National Institute of Economic Research 
produced a model calculation to roughly estimate the economic consequences by 
2030; see section 6, Consequences of Sweden’s goals and actions. Luleå University 
of Technology also completed a model analysis, TIMES Sweden, to shed light on 
cross-sectoral energy system consequences. 
 
Ministry of the Environment  87 (87) 
 
 
 