   
Long term strategy on climate mitigation 
 
The Netherlands 
december 2019 
0 
 1.  Introduction 
 
Climate change mitigation is a matter of great urgency. Pursuant to the national Climate Act, the 
Netherlands needs to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 95% by 2050 compared to 1990. 
This will be a daunting task for the next 30 years. However, the Netherlands is not starting from 
scratch. In many areas, the transition is already under way and will pick up pace considerably over 
the coming years. Furthermore, developments in the Netherlands and worldwide have shown that 
sustainability improvements and economic growth can go hand in hand. This is cause for hope. 
Nevertheless, the Netherlands will continue to face many challenges during the transition. To 
ensure that the country will prepare itself, now is a good time to consider the long-term 
implications of the transition. This long-term strategy has been written with this objective in mind.  
The preparation of a national long-term strategy follows a European agreement laid down in the 
Governance Regulation (EU 2018/1999, Article 15). Each Member State is required to use this 
national strategy to describe how it will contribute towards meeting the goals in the Paris 
Agreement. The strategy must also state what the Member State will contribute towards the 
European goals in the long term in order for the EU to achieve climate neutrality as soon as 
possible and arrive at a highly energy-efficient energy system based largely on renewable energy 
sources. 
The Climate Act has turned the focus of the Netherlands' climate policy emphatically on the long 
term. The act specifies a final target for 2050 and an interim target for 2030. With regard to the 
sector-specific targets under the national Climate Agreement, the government has not only taken 
into account cost-efficiency between now and 2030, but also and expressly steps that need to be 
taken beyond that date to achieve the 2050 target. For this reason, the first Climate Plan under the 
Climate Act also contains policy initiatives to prepare for the long term. 
At the two-year and five-year review stages specified in the Climate Act (progress report and 
Climate Plan review/update, respectively), the government will focus particularly on policies that 
are geared towards the 2050 perspective by means of exploratory studies. 
The Climate Act, Climate Agreement and Climate Plan are not only key steps towards 2030, but 
also form the starting point for trajectories to prepare for the long term and choices that will have 
to be made in the coming years. As a society we do not have all the answers, nor do we possess all 
the facts we need. However, there are numerous social ambitions and points of view about the 
transition in the longer term that, when taken in combination, provide an overall impression of the 
long-term targets. This long-term strategy elaborates these elements and outlines their 
implications for the policy agenda. The objective of this long-term strategy is to serve as a basis for 
further analysis, discussion and policymaking in the years ahead, both at the national and the 
international (European and global) level. The Netherlands Scientific Council for Government Policy 
(Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het Regeringsbeleid, WRR) could make a significant contribution 
towards this as well. The government will therefore consult with the WRR to see how this can be 
added to WRR's agenda.  
 
Structure  
In the Netherlands, policy is largely determined by the coalition agreement and the Climate 
Agreement. The government's climate policy has been elaborated in the Integrated National Energy 
and Climate Plan (NECP), which is submitted in Brussels at the same time as the long-term 
strategy. This meets many of the requirements set by the EU for a national long-term strategy. 
Instead of reiterating those points, the Netherlands has opted to structure its long-term strategy 
differently: as a strategy that sets the agenda for the coming years, without pretending to know all 
the answers in advance.  
Chapter 2 describes which current and proposed policies form the main contributions to the 
transition in the longer term. Together, these can be considered to be the current national 
strategy. Chapter 3 describes the key challenges for the further transition that will require answers, 
solutions and instruments in the coming years. These form the agenda. Finally, Chapter 4 
summarises the policy implications and follow-up steps. 
1 
 Appendix 1 gives an overview of the various sources that were consulted when preparing this 
document. Appendix 2 lists the elements prescribed in the EU Regulation as being required for a 
national long-term strategy, with an indication whether the requested information can be found in 
the NECP or in other public documents.   
2 
 2.  Current policies for the longer term 
 
This chapter describes the national policies that are entirely or partially focused on the longer term. 
The national transition is founded on a set of frameworks and objectives. The rest of the chapter 
describes the Netherlands' efforts in terms of innovation, its policy for the further transformation of 
the energy system and its approach for the longer term with regard to the various sectors.  
 
2.1  Frameworks and objectives 
The Netherlands is a party to the global framework convention on climate change (the United 
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) and the Paris Agreement. As such, it supports 
the global targets to limit global warming to well below 2 °C, strive for a maximum of 1.5 °C and 
achieve a balance between greenhouse gas emissions and the storage of CO  from the atmosphere 
2
on earth, in the second half of this century. 
 
Climate Act 
The Climate Act, which came into effect in 2019, safeguards the long-term focus of the 
Netherlands' national climate policy. It sets out the objectives of this climate policy. The Climate 
Act also establishes a quality control cycle, which is based on the European NECP cycle. In 2019, 
the government finalised the first Climate Plan (national plan, different from NECP). This will be 
reviewed every five years. Pursuant to the Climate Act, the government must report back to 
parliament annually about the progress made with its climate policy through the Climate 
Memorandum. The Council of State has an advisory role in relation to the Climate Plan and the 
Climate Memorandum.  
The Climate Act stipulates that the Netherlands must reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by 95% 
by 2050 compared to 1990. Like most other EU Member States, the Netherlands agrees that the 
EU should be climate neutral by 2050. The Netherlands is committed to the 95% target regardless 
of any other agreements at the European level. This is currently one of the most ambitious targets 
for 2050 laid down by law worldwide.  
As an interim target, the Climate Act specifies that the Netherlands must strive to cut its emission 
level by 49% by 2030 compared to 1990. This ambition exceeds the current European reduction 
target. The Netherlands is striving for a 49% reduction by 2030, as this fits in well with its ambition 
to achieve a gradual transition in the run-up to 2050. It prevents the need for the introduction of 
abrupt measures after 2030 to achieve the 2050 target. A gradual transition will contribute to cost-
efficiency, offer the Dutch business sector a competitive edge in the longer term and give every 
Dutch citizen an opportunity to do his or her bit. 
 
A single national CO  emissions target 
2
By adopting the Climate Act, the Netherlands has chosen emphatically to focus on a single target: 
the reduction of its greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, the Climate Act includes a target to 
achieve a 100% CO -neutral electricity supply by 2050. Energy savings and renewable energy are 
2
considered to be means at the Netherlands' disposal during the transition, to achieve the reduction 
target – they are not themselves seen as primary targets. Similarly, the Netherlands has elected to 
shift its primary focus away from the European 2030 sub-targets for emissions reduction in sectors 
not covered by the European Emissions Trading System (ETS) and for the CO  emissions source-
2
sink ratio with regard to land use. The adopted policies are expected to lead to the Netherlands 
meeting the agreed national targets respectively the contributions to the European 2030 targets for 
these areas. 
As regards the policy proposed for Europe as a whole, the Netherlands is pursuing climate 
neutrality by 2050 and an increase in the European target of a 40% reduction by 2030 to a 55% 
reduction by 2030. Exactly what the translation of such a loftier ambition would entail for the 
Netherlands itself depends on a parallel translation to non-ETS and ETS targets and additional 
3 
 European source-based policy. With regard to the development of technology, the planning of 
investments in the necessary infrastructure and spatial integration planning, the Netherlands is 
already taking into account the possible need to step up its efforts in case the European 2030 
target is raised and its own national target changes as a result. This is because of the lengthy lead 
times involved. 
 
Climate Plan and Climate Agreement 
In 2019, the government finalised the first Climate Plan. This Climate Plan outlines the key tenets 
of the climate policy to be implemented over the next 10 years. In addition, the Climate Plan 
addresses the latest scientific insights into climate change, technological developments, 
international policy developments and the consequences for the economy. As such, the Climate 
Plan summarises the national policy, the context in which this policy is developed and the 
consequences of this policy.  
To an important extent, the contents of the Climate Plan are based on the Climate Agreement, 
which was concluded between more than 100 civil society parties (both public and private). This 
agreement contains a package of measures that have the active support of as many contributing 
parties as possible and which will achieve the political reduction target of 49% by 2030. 
The Climate Agreement intentionally assumes indicative sector-specific targets that are not only 
based on a cost-effective set of measures until 2030, but also take into account the desirability of 
longer-term measures to aid transition. Many of the specifics in the agreement therefore have a 
long-term impact, given that they can either be extended after 2030 or contribute to driving the 
transition that is required in the longer term. Lastly, the parties to the Climate Agreement have 
formulated joint ambitions for the period until 2050. 
 
2.2  Preparing for the period after 2030: innovation efforts 
As part of the Climate Agreement, the parties have drawn up an Integrated Knowledge and 
Innovation Agenda (IKIA), which lists the social as well as technological innovation priorities for all 
sectors. The IKIA specifies the most important knowledge and innovation challenges for the short 
term (development, demonstration and rollout) and the long term (research and development). 
This is key to achieving the 2030 targets and will lay the foundations for achieving the 2050 target. 
Striving for innovation through applied and fundamental research will lower the costs of the 
transition in the longer term and help boost the Dutch economy.  
The IKIA is mission-driven, i.e. the agenda helps to bring societal missions into perspective and 
realise those missions. The IKIA has been elaborated into multi-year, mission-driven innovation 
programmes (MMIPs), for which the involvement of both innovation suppliers and the buyers and 
users of those innovations in the development and innovation process is crucial. This, in turn, 
affects the actual implementation of the innovations. With regard to the issue of climate and 
energy, the IKIA determines the use of the public funds of the Netherlands Organisation for 
Scientific Research (Nederlandse Organisatie voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek, NWO) and the 
applied research institutes (TO2) for the top sectors, as well as the use of the PPP allowance, the 
SME innovation stimulus and the ministerial innovation budgets for climate and energy.  
 
2.3  Transformation of the energy system 
The transition to a low-CO  society will have consequences for the structure of the energy system. 
2
Moreover, the interaction and correlation between energy and spatial planning policies will grow. A 
sustainable energy system requires more space than a fossil-based system. This will have 
immediate consequences for the physical environment as currently experienced by citizens and 
business owners. The impact of the transition on the physical environment will be considerable: 
cities and landscapes will change as a result. This will require careful decision-making at both the 
central and the decentralised levels. As long as the transition to a sustainable energy system 
remains incomplete, a hybrid system will remain in place in which renewable and fossil-based 
4 
 energy sources will continue to coexist, requiring the government to guarantee the affordability, 
safety and security of supply. 
 
System integration 
The aim is for a system integration to take place of various sources of energy, resulting in a more 
efficient use of infrastructure and generation capacity and a greater resilience of the energy system 
at the decentralised level against outages at the central level. The production of renewable fuels 
and the capture and reuse of CO  can also contribute to further integration of the energy system. 
2
The Netherlands is preparing for these system transformations by drawing up a governmental 
vision on the Organisation of the Market for the Energy Transition to make choices, mainly 
regarding the structure, regulation and funding of heating, hydrogen and CO  infrastructure for 
2
both public and private parties. This governmental vision will be presented in the second half of 
2020.  
The Netherlands has integrated sufficient flexibility in its arrangements to compensate for a drop in 
supply or demand, such as through the availability of demand-side response, storage and 
controllable capacity. The growing importance of solar and wind energy will require further 
strengthening of this flexibility. For this reason, the government is investing in flexibility 
demonstration projects and has made this challenge a topic of study for knowledge and innovation 
programmes. Furthermore, the Netherlands will continue its efforts to expand its interconnection 
capacity with neighbouring countries. 
 
Spatial integration 
The Netherlands is already preparing for the spatial integration of a transformed energy system in 
a variety of ways. Regional energy strategies (RES) are being used to chart suitable areas for 
generating renewable energy onshore. The objective is to formulate a locally supported vision on 
the development of renewable energy generation and use this as a basis for a predictable pipeline 
of projects. The elaboration of the RES is supported by the National Strategy on Spatial Planning 
and Environment. This specifies balancing principles to facilitate spatial detailing and further 
guidance for the choices to be made as regards the integration of renewable energy. The 
government's spatial planning policy is laid down in the national main energy infrastructure 
programme to guarantee timely and affordable investments in the national energy infrastructure, 
even beyond 2030, for all links in the energy chain and for electricity as well as heating and 
industry. The network operators' long-term comprehensive infrastructure survey will contribute to 
this. An agreement on the North Sea is planned to determine additional wind farm zones for the 
period beyond 2030, with specifics regarding careful integration.  
 
Sustainable energy sources 
While the government is convinced that sustainable biomass will be required for the transition to a 
climate-neutral and circular society, it also believes that a genuine contribution can only be made 
by biomass that is truly sustainable. To this end, it is working on a uniform sustainability 
framework to guarantee that all biomass used in the Netherlands is sustainable. The government is 
also at pains to ensure that use will be restricted in due course and that it will be applied as high-
grade as possible. This means that, in time, sustainable biomass will be used only in sectors where 
no cost-efficient alternative is available, such as aviation and shipping. To make sure that the 
supply of sustainable biomass meets the demand, the government is working to increase the 
availability of domestic biomass, to facilitate cascading for applications that are as high-grade as 
possible and to monitor supply and demand, so that corrective action can be taken if needed. 
In the long term, the Netherlands has envisaged a significant role for green hydrogen as a fuel for 
industry and both heavy and long-distance transport, and for the built environment in areas where 
other CO -free alternatives are more expensive or more difficult to realise. Hydrogen also offers 
2
opportunities for the flexibilisation of the electricity system. As a result, the Netherlands has 
5 
 launched an ambitious hydrogen programme focused on scaling up the supply of sustainable 
hydrogen and developing the necessary infrastructure. 
Green gas is also regarded as part of the industrial feedstock solution, for processes that are 
difficult to electrify and as a flexible power supply on occasions when there is a limited availability 
of solar and wind power. The Netherlands is currently working on a roadmap for creating the right 
conditions for a sufficient supply of green gas and a reduction in production costs. 
 
2.4  Long-term approach in all sectors 
The Climate Agreement contains agreements for all sectors. The main focus of these is to achieve 
the 2030 targets, but they also contain specific stipulations for the period beyond 2030. Even if all 
sectors speed up the transition to an ambitious extent, as intended, we will still face a significant 
challenge after 2030 that we should prepare for now. 
 
Built environment 
With regard to the built environment, the Netherlands is making full use of the time available to 
realise the transition. It is making a start now, so that it will be able to use the full 30-year period 
to realise this drastic transition. The focal points of this strategy are a district-oriented approach 
under the supervision of the municipalities and the development of heating plans. These are 
intended to lend shape to the transition at the district level. As part of this approach, individual 
homeowners will be supported with and given access to government subsidies, loans with 
advantageous terms and comprehensive information. This information includes the insulation 
standard and the related long-term target values, which are intended to ensure that homeowners 
do not make decisions now that will necessitate another round of buildings works further down the 
line. At the same time, innovation programmes will be used to allow the building sector to develop 
concepts and products that will enable large-scale, rapid and cheaper sustainability improvements. 
Sustainable heating will be provided by means of heating networks, electrical heat pumps and the 
occasional use of green gas and hydrogen, provided the future supply of these latter two resources 
is assured. Regarding non-residential buildings, a coherent set of standardisation measures and 
supporting instruments with final standards for 2050 will be developed in collaboration with 
umbrella organisations. 
 
Industry 
With regard to industry, the focus will be on cost reductions and the development of CO -reducing 
2
technologies through a combination of innovation, demonstration and pilot projects. In each of the 
five regional energy-intensive industry clusters, a multi-year frontrunner programme will be 
developed that combines efficiency improvements with more sustainable resource use and CO  
2
reduction. The rollout will be stimulated by a CO  tax and supported with an SDE++ subsidy. 
2
Furthermore, industry will contribute to the transition of other parties, such as by introducing a 
buffer in the energy system, providing heating for the built environment and producing sustainable 
fuels. The government will also investigate how (including by way of carbon accounting) the supply 
chain impact of circular measures, such as recycling and the use of biobased and other raw 
materials, can be identified and how this can be integrated into policy. 
 
Mobility 
The mobility measures will contribute to bringing about the fundamental but necessary change to 
the ways of transporting persons and goods. Efforts will concentrate on reducing car use by making 
alternative modes of transport more attractive. Another point for attention is to increase the 
availability of emission-free energy sources. As an example, the charging infrastructure for electric 
vehicles will be brought up to standard and legislation and subsidies will be deployed to increase 
the production of hydrogen, sustainable advanced biofuels and renewable synthetic fuels. 
Furthermore, the purchase and use of emission-free vehicles will be stimulated and the use of 
6 
 emission-producing vehicles will be discouraged through zero-emission zones, amended policies for 
delivery vans and research into a potential transition to a payment according to use model after 
2025. Through innovation programmes, the government will continue to work on social innovation 
and behavioural change, digitalisation and improved sustainability for vehicles, battery technology 
and energy carriers. 
 
Agriculture and land use 
With regard to agriculture, the focus will mainly be on the further development of solutions that 
could contribute to the further transition towards nature-inclusive and circular agriculture. As for 
livestock farming, efforts will concentrate on making stables emission-free, making changes to 
animal feed and improving the processing of manure. In the greenhouse horticulture sector, work 
will continue on achieving energy savings, generating sustainable energy and using heating 
provided by third parties and CO  for fertilisation. Efforts will also be made to change the 
2
behavioural patterns of food consumers in order to reduce food wastage and increase the uptake of 
more sustainable, plant-based foods. Smart solutions are also being sought regarding land use, 
including pilot projects to raise the water level in peat meadow areas. In addition, various 
measures will be introduced that will contribute to increased carbon capture over time. This will 
expand the natural area, restore landscape structures, limit deforestation, lead to the planting of 
new trees and increase carbon capture in agricultural soils through smart and sustainable use. 
 
   
7 
 3.  Strategic challenges 
 
This chapter outlines three central challenges that the government has designated common 
threads for the long-term policy agenda:  
- Working on an attractive prospect for all concerned  
- Being adaptive without hanging back  
- Stepping up cross-border cooperation  
In Chapter 4, these are translated into implications for the policy agenda for the coming years.  
 
3.1  Working on an attractive prospect for all concerned 
The transition to a low-CO  society involves much more than the completion of a transition path 
2
towards 2050. It affects the way people work and live. The climate policy unites many policy areas, 
not only on paper, but also in practice: it makes them visible and tangible in people's living 
environment. The integrated nature of the transition not only makes explicit that a successful 
transition depends on the participation of all parties involved, but also and most of all that all 
parties should focus on the attractive prospect that the transition offers. This appealing, inviting 
and explainable prospect explicitly connects the climate challenge to other societal challenges that 
the Netherlands and Europe are faced with.  
 
An attractive prospect is an integrated prospect 
While the target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions is clear, it says little about what the 
Netherlands will look like in 2050. What would such a country be like? Recently, the Board of 
Government Advisers published its recommendation 'By way of Paris'1, an exploratory study into an 
answer to the question how the Paris Agreement could make the Netherlands wealthier, cleaner 
and more united. The recommendation is a successful attempt to visualise the remote future with 
the help of spatial designers. It also shows how linking societal challenges can lead to integrated 
solutions and how those solutions manifest themselves in the living environment: on the North Sea 
and in communities.  
In order to bring about a transition that all parties can and want to take part in, a focus on the 
attractive prospect that the transition offers is key. Such a prospect offers opportunities such as 
cleaner air, less noise pollution from traffic and a competitive edge for Dutch businesses and 
knowledge institutions in the growth markets of the future, while being open about the sometimes 
complex challenges that need to be answered, such as the changing landscape, the even greater 
competition for the scarce available space, strategic choices regarding the 'avoidance' of 
investments on which there will be no return and the question of how to deal with the cost of 
'phasing out' climate-unfriendly processes.  
 
Climate policy can never be self-contained 
An awareness of the integrated, attractive prospect leads to a realisation that climate policy cannot 
be limited to the reduction of CO  emissions alone. It is also – or even mainly – about the Dutch 
2
economy and the quality of the Dutch living environment. As all parties, citizens and businesses 
alike, will be affected by the transition differently, climate policy must also deal with challenges 
regarding burden-sharing and feelings of inequality and injustice.  
The Climate Agreement emphatically targets an integrated approach to the climate challenge. The 
measures to be taken for the sectors depart from a vision of the future that encompasses more 
than CO  reduction alone. It is specifically linked to the transitions towards circular agriculture and 
2
a circular economy. Spatial integration, support and participation have been important 
considerations in the discussions about the measures to be taken. The wider social and economic 
perspective was also considered, in both the narrow and the broad sense. Key points of departure 
 
1 https://www.collegevanrijksadviseurs.nl/adviezen-publicaties/publicatie/2019/10/17/via-parijs 
8 
 are fair burden-sharing between citizens and businesses and a net zero effect in terms of housing 
costs in the built environment. Such an integrated approach will remain necessary as the 
Netherlands moves into the future.  
With regard to the prospect that the transition offers to all parties involved, it is also important to 
note that sectoral education and labour market agendas are being developed to ensure that 
employees are sufficiently qualified and opportunities for the economy and job growth can be 
seized. This includes a provision for the mitigation of social risks, such as job losses in sectors that 
rely on fossil fuels. Changes to the school curriculum should ensure that all students and pupils are 
equipped with the right knowledge and skills to be able to cope effectively with major societal 
transitions, such as the energy transition. This will give people the confidence that they will not be 
left behind by this transition. 
The government welcomes the adoption of a European Green Deal that is ambitious and takes into 
account both the attractive prospect and the links between societal challenges. It is equally pleased 
that the Green Deal is not merely focused on policy in the various climate transition sectors, but 
explicitly provides for the transformation of economic and financial systems. As far as the 
Netherlands is concerned, at least 25% of the Multi-Annual Financial Framework (MFF) should be 
reserved for climate funding and both the MFF and the funding provided by the European 
Investment Bank should be brought completely into line with the Paris Agreements targets. It also 
believes that it is important for all instruments to be adjusted in line with the actual target to be 
achieved in a cost-effective manner and in such a way that carbon leakage is prevented, starting 
with enshrining the European 2050 target into law.  
 
The importance of an integrated approach also means getting a grip on administrative complexity 
In the coming years, the Netherlands will need to both elaborate the ambitions in the Climate 
Agreement and put them into practice. The country's existing administrative complexity poses a 
considerable challenge in his regard. This presents itself in different ways. Climate policy is not the 
preserve of a single ministry, but of nearly all ministries combined. Nor does it affect only a single 
layer of government, but all of them. It is not a task for either the private or the public sector, but 
for the private and public sectors together.  
There are currently a large number of societal activities that have the potential to further the 
transition. It is important in this context to be wary of coordination problems, as otherwise parties 
may be less considerate of each other's interests or wait for each other unnecessarily, potentially 
delaying the transition and letting economic opportunities go to waste. The Climate Agreement is 
one of the ways in which the government hopes to contribute to the required coordination between 
parties. An inspirational example has been set by the financial sector, which has the potential to 
become a driving force behind the transition. This sector has decided to sign up to the Climate 
Agreement with an ambitious climate commitment, which it intends to convert into specific action 
in the coming period. 
The success of the transition ultimately depends on the harmonious cooperation of many different 
actors. The challenge for the government is to get a grip on this complexity, starting with a 
clarification of the supervision, roles and responsibilities of the national government, local 
governments, private and public parties and citizens. It will also involve a search for new methods 
of cooperation, both between the various levels of government and between the government and 
civil society parties. 
At the European level, a broad stakeholder approach consisting of agreements on each party's 
contribution could also contribute to kick-starting a larger movement, such as in regard to the 
financial sector. This is because all European providers of financial services should bring their entire 
portfolios in line with the ambitions in the Paris Agreement in due course.  
 
   
9 
 3.2  Being adaptive without hanging back 
The transition will be characterised by many uncertainties. Ideas may change and new solutions 
may appear out of the blue. That is why it would be sensible not to set every agreement in stone in 
advance. It must be possible to adapt policy when required. At the same time, the climate policy is 
based on strict targets. The transition will require swift action and hence clear frameworks that are 
to be defined by the government. As the 2030 and 2050 deadlines draw closer, these frameworks 
and the instruments that form part of them will need to become more binding.  
 
Climate policy must anticipate new developments 
The attractive prospect described in 3.1 may offer guidance, but can never offer certainty. 
Unpredictable economic, political or ecological events on a national or international scale will 
require adaptability and a capacity for innovation. Climate policy must not only involve taking 
robust steps towards 2030 with well-developed initiatives to put viable and affordable options into 
practice, but also leave space for the discovery and development of new options. This will allow the 
parties involved to adapt and learn from any mistakes.  
The transition in the electricity sector may serve as an illustration. The Netherlands is taking robust 
steps to increase the availability of solar and wind power. There is now an opportunity to roll out 
these options in a cost-effective manner, while leaving room in policy initiatives to take other public 
interests into account, such as with regard to nature and the living environment. In order to enable 
the large-scale integration of the generation of renewable energy through wind and solar power, 
the system must become more flexible. Such flexibility could result from interconnectivity, 
demand-side response, storage and controllable production. Technology neutrality is the point of 
departure in this regard. To this end, the Climate Agreement specifies adequate monitoring of 
developments that are currently still uncertain. Monitoring should provide insight into whether 
these options will actually develop according to plan and whether it is possible to use them flexibly 
in technical and commercial terms. As a result of the further growth of electrification and the ever-
decreasing emission allocation, the need for CO -free adjustable production will rise even further. It 
2
will be possible to feed the electricity system with CO -free adjustable production in a number of 
2
ways: with electricity from CO -free hydrogen or from other renewable sources, such as biomass 
2
and green gas, from nuclear power or from fossil sources where CO  is captured. The various 
2
technological solutions entail different realisation periods, costs, social support and other traits, 
making them either more or less realistic for the period leading up to 2030. During this transition 
period, biomass could be used in a number of different ways.  
The transition requires the adoption of a broad spectrum of options, with none remaining taboo 
The government will be required to make choices with consideration for the specific strengths and 
comparative advantages that the Netherlands enjoys. This does not mean that it should dismiss 
options out of hand. Such a course of action could not only prove costly if opportunities are 
missed; analyses conducted by the IPCC and others show that not many options can be excluded 
completely, lest governments fail to achieve their targets.  
The coherent use of biomass, nuclear energy and carbon capture and storage (CCS) is a known 
trilemma. A cost-efficient transition to a 95% reduction by 2050 is barely conceivable without the 
use of at least two of these options2. For this reason, the government is giving parties space to 
develop these options further in a way that befits the transition in the longer term. The CCS policy 
is a good example of this. In potential, the Netherlands offers ample opportunities for CCS. CCS 
offers an alternative to the use of electricity and biomass on a large scale, which will eventually 
create problems in terms of space and sustainability. Furthermore, CCS offers the opportunity to 
use CO  as a raw material for the chemical industry and enables negative emissions through a 
2
combination with bioenergy.  
 
 
2 Ros, J and D. Daniëls, 2017, Verkenning van klimaatdoelen. Van lange termijn beelden naar korte termijn actie 
(Exploration of climate goals: from long-term vision to short-term action). The Hague: Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency 
10 
 Adaptivity should not lead to a lack of commitment; speeding up the transition requires a clear 
policy framework that becomes more binding as the transition progresses 
It is widely appreciated that the need to mitigate climate change is a serious challenge, as part of 
which all parties need to adapt. This will require considerable effort. In many ways, society is not 
equipped to cope with this transition. This presupposes a change of habits, which is not easy to 
achieve. It may feel like a loss of privileges without a clear idea of what to expect in return. 
The transition could be facilitated by instruments of a stimulatory nature that reward citizens and 
business that have the opportunity and the will to take steps now. This will enable the Netherlands 
to find out in a positive way what works and what does not. It is equally clear that many of the 
required changes can be integrated into daily routines fairly straightforwardly. From the 
perspective of citizens, it is easy to achieve climate benefits by adopting changes to production 
processes and products that require little behavioural change, such as energy-saving appliances or 
applications like smart meters. In addition, the climate footprint of citizens will also change 
autonomously as a result of the increasing availability of climate-friendly products and solutions 
that they find appealing. Whether they relate to food consumption, mobility needs or the use of 
technology, it is likely that climate-friendly alternatives will increasingly become the norm.  
In other cases, citizens will be asked to play a more active role and show greater commitment, 
such as in terms of changing the way they heat their homes. This process is fraught with difficulty 
and will require the government and the private sector to facilitate this and offer a clear 
perspective for action. In this context, fair burden-sharing will increase trust and help ensure 
sufficient financial room for the necessary investments. The government has a clear role to play in 
this regard as well. 
As the transition gathers pace, the balance between gentle prompting and compulsion will change. 
When the above conditions for the participation of citizens are met, there will be greater scope for 
more compulsive instruments, such as normative measures. This requires commitment. The Paris 
Agreement targets leave governments no room for vacillation; the bus will not wait to depart until 
everyone has gotten on board. If that were the case, the pace of transition would be set by those 
lagging behind, leaving the achievement of the Paris Agreement targets an increasingly remote 
prospect. 
To a certain extent, what goes for citizens goes for businesses as well. Stimulatory policy initiatives 
that rewards business that take the lead will stimulate innovation and yield opportunities for 
growth, but will ultimately not suffice to spur all businesses to action. Moreover, we will need to 
accept that not all businesses will be able to join the transition. Sooner or later, the government 
will therefore need to find an answer to the question of whether to actively counter or compensate 
for the effect of parties being left behind. 
 
3.3  Stepping up cross-border cooperation  
An emission reduction target of 95% in the Netherlands and a climate-neutral Europe by 2050 are 
lofty ambitions in view of the Paris Agreement. Achieving those ambitions will require a 
considerable step up in terms of cross-border cooperation. There is much to be gained from 
collaborating with the rest of the world. This cooperation will need to be leveraged to further the 
transition and ensure that all countries and sectors meet the international targets.  
 
The transition requires an increase in cross-border cooperation and solidarity across the EU  
Climate change is a global problem that can only be tackled on a global scale. The Netherlands is 
doing its part, without losing sight of its own interests. While there are already many steps that can 
be taken nationally, the international dimension of climate policy will become ever more important 
as 2050 approaches. The EU is in a unique position to take the lead at the international level and 
set an ambitious long-term goal, as well as adopt the necessary measures to ensure that the 
targets in the Paris Agreement remain within reach. 
Already, the efforts of Member States are guided to a significant extent by European instruments. 
The European Emissions Trading System ETS is an established instrument for businesses 
11 
 throughout Europe to achieve emission reductions in areas where they can be most efficient. The 
Netherlands is an enthusiastic proponent of this instrument due to its cost-efficiency and the level 
playing field it creates, but there is always room for improvement. A sensible course of action 
would be to fine-tune the ETS and reduce the number of available allocations at a more rapid pace, 
in line with the more ambitious European targets for 2030 and 2050. In addition, the ETS could be 
extended to other sectors, although the effectiveness of this will have to be corroborated by 
research.  
In addition, the Netherlands is partnering with others in Europe with regard to a number of specific 
themes. As an example, we are working with other countries to maximise the potential of the North 
Sea. When shaping these partnerships, each country will need to keep in mind its own national 
commitments. Nevertheless, the common European challenge will have to play an increasingly vital 
role. Other countries may wish to use the North Sea as a wind farm zone or to store CO  if they 
2
have fewer opportunities to do so on their own soil. From a Dutch perspective, this may initially 
seem undesirable, but the wider European challenge necessitates a joint and well-considered 
decision-making process. A similar example is offered by the further integration of the European 
electricity system. The efficient fossil fuel production facilities in the Netherlands could provide 
other countries with an opportunity to transition more quickly to renewable sources, without 
endangering the common security of supply. Vice versa, other countries have more space to plant 
additional trees than the Netherlands. To sum up, the Netherlands' bilateral relations in Europe will 
need to be characterised to a growing degree by the identification of common interests and 
opportunities. 
It will need to keep an open mind to cross-border solutions that may not seem like a good fit with 
its own commitments, but may be key to addressing the common European challenge. Eventually, 
the role of the market and the desirability of financial agreements between countries will also need 
to be considered. Existing European instruments allow scope, however limited, for transferring one 
country's challenges to another. Within the EU, it would be advisable to initiate a timely exploration 
of further ways to stimulate mutual solidarity, to ensure that the EU as a whole becomes climate-
neutral. 
 
An ambitious long-term strategy must go hand in hand with international cooperation 
To keep the targets in the Paris Agreement within reach, it is important that countries outside the 
EU take ambitious steps as well. Such steps are necessary to retain support in the Netherlands and 
throughout Europe for an ambitious climate policy. In the Paris Agreement, all countries agreed to 
specify a national climate commitment. However, in some cases it is not self-evident that these 
commitments meet the level of ambition in the agreement. Countries may cite geopolitical, 
economic or other reasons for making less of a transition effort than is desirable from a global 
perspective. In various countries, the economy depends to a large extent on activities with a 
detrimental climate effect, such as the extraction of fossil raw materials or activities that lead to 
deforestation. In most cases, these activities are maintained because of a demand from other 
countries, including the Netherlands.  
For this reason, the Netherlands proposes that climate becomes a cornerstone of the EU's foreign, 
trade and development relations. The government will use climate diplomacy in both bilateral and 
joint European contacts to spur countries outside of the EU to action. Furthermore, the Netherlands 
will extend climate funding to developing countries to help them tackle their climate challenges. 
Signing the Paris Agreement should become an essential precondition for new trade agreements 
with countries outside the EU. In addition, the Netherlands could contribute to the transition in 
other countries by entering into international partnerships. This would have the beneficial side 
effect of offering opportunities for the Dutch earnings model.  
An example is the formation of alliances regarding green hydrogen. This could go hand in hand 
with stimulating a climate-friendly earnings model in other countries. Foreign demand for synthetic 
fuels and green hydrogen could offer an attractive prospect for oil-producing countries that benefit 
from sunny climes and well-functioning existing fuel infrastructures. Partnerships with regard to 
sustainably grown plants and trees could form a similarly attractive prospect for countries. Plants 
and trees are in demand due to the increasing appetite for vegetarian food, as raw materials for 
12 
 the circular economy and as a renewable energy source. This could aid countries in achieving more 
sustainable land use, while being beneficial to the Netherlands due to its limited space for the 
production of sustainable biomass. It could also yield new earnings capacity for businesses in the 
logistics and processing sectors.  
Civil society parties could play a key role in making international production chains more 
sustainable and more climate-friendly, provided they are facilitated in fulfilling that role. A policy 
aimed at reducing the climate footprint could provide incentives to businesses to adopt more 
sustainable production methods and to consumers to buy more sustainable products. This is also in 
line with the chain approach to the transition to a circular economy. Instruments already exist to 
chart the climate footprint, such as the European Product Environmental Footprint, and to mitigate 
the footprint in trade flows, both in terms of private initiatives and public-sector tendering 
processes. The Netherlands could step up its efforts in the international arena to have these 
instruments adopted more widely.  
In addition to instruments with a direct impact on the chain, a carbon border adjustment on 
Europe's external borders could also aid the transition, as certain less climate-friendly products 
from outside the EU would become less attractive to European buyers. This would allow certain 
European business sectors to operate in a more climate-friendly way without fear of competition 
from products made in countries with lower standards, and incentivise countries outside the EU to 
take more drastic action against climate change. As such, the Netherlands welcomes the European 
Commission's initiative to elaborate such an instrument. 
 
International sectors must make a suitable contribution as well 
In addition to the national climate commitments of individual countries, internationally active 
sectors must also contribute to achieving the global climate targets in the Paris Agreement to 
ensure that these remain within reach. While international aviation and shipping are outside of the 
scope of the national targets, they are of vital importance to the Dutch economy. It follows that the 
Netherlands depends on cooperation within the EU and with other like-minded countries for its 
perspective for action. 
As regards international aviation, the Netherlands and other European countries are working to 
raise the current ICAO target of a 50% reduction in emissions by 2050 compared to 2005. A new 
long-term target is needed to bring the sector's CO  emissions more in line with the targets in the 
2
Paris Agreement. Part of the national focus on innovation is the development and upscaling of 
renewable kerosene. As regards international shipping, the Netherlands is working together with a 
group of ambitious countries to further the implementation of agreements on the phased increase 
in the strictness of average emission requirements for all vessels and on design requirements for 
new vessels, so that the international shipping sector will be able to achieve the long-term goal 
adopted last year by the IMO.  
 
Need for a global move towards negative emissions 
As the transition progresses, it will become more difficult to reduce emissions further, domestically 
and in terms of cross-border cooperation as well. In the case of far-reaching emission reductions 
on a global scale, the scope for countries to offer resources to other countries will be limited, as 
they will not be able to use those to meet their own targets. In a climate-neutral world, the 
remaining emissions will need to be compensated by capturing CO  from the atmosphere, i.e. 
2
negative emissions. According to the IPCC, this approach will need to be adopted worldwide in 
order to limit global warming to 1.5 °C.  
Negative emissions can take various forms. The Dutch policy already focuses on the capture of CO  
2
in farmland, but the remaining capacity in the Netherlands' already fertile farmlands is limited. At 
the same time, the draining of peat meadow areas has resulted in significant remaining emissions. 
In addition, the Netherlands is focusing on the capture of CO  with vegetation, for example by 
2
planting more trees. This could have a positive effect on other factors, such as biodiversity, 
landscape diversity and climate adaptability. Again, however, the Netherlands has limited space. 
13 
 On the other hand, there is a significant potential in the country to retain the CO  captured in 
2
vegetation beyond the harvest. This could be achieved, for instance, by the use of wood as a 
building material, producing and recycling bioplastics and combining bioenergy with CCS.  
The European target of climate neutrality for its entire territory is expected to require a significant 
contribution to be made in this area. Moreover, emissions generated by international aviation and 
shipping are likely to be extremely difficult to bring down to zero. As 2050 draws near, several 
parties are therefore expected to require increased capture of CO  to remain on course to achieve 
2
the targets in the Paris Agreement. This raises the question of what kind of contribution the 
Netherlands and Europe are able and prepared to make in this respect. 
 
   
14 
 4.  Policy agenda 
 
We find ourselves on the eve of a major transition towards a nearly climate-neutral society, to 
contribute to achieving the Paris Agreement targets. There are 30 years left to go – time that 
should be spent wisely. The Netherlands has opted for a gradual transition, to avoid compulsory 
shocks to the system and take full advantage economically and socially from a status as 
frontrunner. Its policy approach is not to be more stringent, but to start sooner.  
While a 30-year transition cannot be planned down to the last detail, it is possible to make 
thorough preparations. One thing that is certain is that things will not play out as currently 
expected. That certainty may have a paralysing effect, but it can also put minds at ease. The fact 
that some of the answers are still unknown leaves room for asking frank questions and confronting 
dilemmas. The objective of this long-term strategy, therefore, is not to provide cut-and-dried 
answers, but to shape the discussion about the strategy for the long term. 
This long-term strategy outlines the strategic challenges that we will face and that will ever more 
insistently demand answers from politics and society. Rather than waiting until 2030 or even later, 
we should start tackling those challenges now. As Chapter 2 of this long-term strategy has shown, 
in the Netherlands much has already been set in motion. However, there is more that can and 
should be done. Both the Netherlands and Europe must work towards the 2030 targets, explicitly 
treating them as an intermediate step on the way to 2050 and beyond.  
The general implications for the Netherlands' national and international policy efforts and the 
European policy implications are set out below. 
 
National and international  
•  A transition that is achievable and affordable for all parties cannot be brought about without an 
attractive prospect. To achieve the 49% target by 2030, society will need to be transformed. 
However, a 95% reduction will require additional measures. This requires an attractive 
prospect for the transition that is appealing, inviting and explainable, featuring coherent visions 
for the future, the certainty of integrated considerations and clear supervision and 
responsibilities.  
•  Part of an attractive prospect is a clear vision for the future of our sustainable earnings 
capacity and a policy to boost the economic sectors that will be key to future growth. The 
government will issue a letter on this subject shortly. 
•  The Climate Agreement is a start to an approach that will see climate policy become an 
increasingly integrated part of all other government policy. In due course, climate policy will 
have to shift away from being self-contained. Integrated considerations will have to be made in 
all sectors and policy areas, taking into account the effects on the transition towards climate 
neutrality.  
•  Within the framework of the Climate Agreement, the government has developed new forms of 
collaboration to shape the transition together with others, looking beyond the boundaries of 
existing structures. The regional energy strategies are a prime example. There will be growing 
need for a clear concept of the roles, responsibilities and innovative supervisory models in 
addition to existing structures: between the various tiers of government, between public and 
private parties and across sectors.  
•  Throughout the transition, parties will need to keep learning from what works and what does 
not. The government will have to make choices by excluding options that do not work and by 
experimenting with new options and solutions. There can be no taboos in this respect, and 
even topics such as CCS, sustainable biomass and nuclear energy must be approached with an 
open mind. In various areas, choices will need to be made in good time, to ensure security of 
investment and because investments have a long-term effect on the structure of society. 
•  By taking ample time for the transition and using stimulatory instruments, we can make a start 
with the transition while working to increase support. Ultimately, however, the pace of the 
15 
 transition cannot be set by those lagging behind: the bus will not wait to depart until everyone 
has gotten on board. Eventually, other instruments of a compensatory or normative nature will 
need to be deployed to bring those lagging behind into the fold in a timely manner.  
•  Our international economic relationships could prove a powerful tool to support our sustainable 
earnings capacity, while at the same time helping other countries to make the transition. As 
the transition will only be meaningful if all parties take part, we must actively seek out new 
forms of international collaboration.  
•  The international aviation and shipping sectors must make a suitable contribution to the 
transition as well, without losing sight of the Dutch earnings model. It is therefore important to 
work together with like-minded countries to strive for ambitious international targets and 
suitable measures. 
•  The international transition requires solidarity at the international level. In the end, even the 
climate challenge boils down to a matter of burden-sharing. In parallel to the ambitious 
national and European agenda, it would be advisable to consider the options at our disposal for 
using international instruments to aid the transition elsewhere.  
•  In spite of ambitious emission reduction policies, the capture of CO  from the atmosphere on a 
2
large scale and at a global level will be required in order to limit global warming to 1.5 °C. We 
will have to determine what kind of contribution we could and should make in this respect.  
 
European policy implications 
•  Setting a goal of climate neutrality by 2050 is an important condition for the EU to achieve the 
1.5 °C target and meet its commitment to the Paris Agreement. In relation to this, a more 
ambitious 2030 target for the EU as a whole is required to remain on course to achieve the 
Paris Agreement targets. The Netherlands is focused on the target of a 55% reduction in EU 
emissions by 2030 compared to 1990. It is clear that raising these targets will need to go hand 
in hand with policies to offer the regions that will be most affected by the social and economic 
consequences of the transition perspectives for innovation, new economic activities and job 
growth. A fair and affordable transition is an essential condition for retaining support. 
•  At the heart of the plans of the new European Commission for a European Green Deal is the 
ambition to work towards an integrated climate and sustainability policy across sectors, with an 
eye on other policy targets and interests and with the involvement of all relevant parties. The 
Netherlands supports this approach, which is comparable to its own as laid down in the Climate 
Agreement. Just like in the Netherlands, however, this climate policy will need to be embedded 
thoroughly in the coming years in both the sectors where the actual greenhouse gas emission 
reductions are to be achieved and in the transformed economic and financial systems. The 
purpose of this is to encourage climate-friendly production and consumption practices and 
discourage those that are less climate-friendly.  
•  Choosing an EU-wide policy means choosing a level playing field. The greater the effort to 
develop common instruments for cross-border sectors in the EU, the more effective the 
transition in the whole of Europe will be. For open economies like the Dutch one, this is a 
critical process. The promotion of a cost-efficient transition requires a tightening of the ETS, 
including the stimulation of negative emissions to achieve climate neutrality in the EU. 
•  Taking the lead as EU also means providing incentives to others to join the transition. A carbon 
border adjustment could provide such an incentive. As it protects the level playing field for 
certain industries in the EU and provides an impetus for emission reduction in the chain at the 
same time, such a measure would be a good fit with the strategy to speed up the transition in 
Europe and boost it elsewhere. 
 
 
 
 
16 
 Appendix 1. Sources 
 
Chapter 2 is largely based on the Climate Agreement and the Climate Plan. A variety of sources 
was used to identify the relevant challenges highlighted in Chapter 3. These include a number of 
meetings with actors that are relevant to the transition and a consultation between ministries. The 
following sources also proved particularly useful. 
 
Public opinion 
Pursuant to the European Governance Regulation, the public should be given effective opportunities 
at an early stage to have a say in the formulation of the long-term strategy. In addition, the 
strategy should contain a summary of public opinion. The public was involved in the formulation of 
the current policy as specified in Chapter 2 in many different ways, including through a broad 
public consultation as part of the preparation of the Climate Agreement. The strategic challenges 
outlined in Chapter 3 are based in part on many points of view expressed by the public in a variety 
of ways, for example in the discussions surrounding the Climate Agreement, in publications issued 
by stakeholders and through social and other media. 
In addition, the internet consultation regarding the Climate Plan and the NECP involved asking 
members of the wider public to suggest topics that they believed were worthy of particular 
attention in the Netherlands' long-term climate policy (2030–2050). The open character of the 
question invited an extensive range of opinions. As an example, some believed that nuclear 
energy, specifically on the basis of thorium, has potential as an energy source due to the limited 
space required, the low impact on nature and the minimal CO  emissions. Others regarded 
2
hydrogen as a suitable future fuel for transport and heating due to the potential to use the existing 
infrastructure for gas. Some believed that innovation and behavioural change should be prioritised, 
mentioning a number of themes. Others suggested the environment and nature as important 
considerations. Many of those consulted regarded afforestation as a positive development and the 
burning of biomass as unsustainable. The full consultation report can be found at 
www.internetconsultatie.nl. 
 
Essays 
In order to gather a multitude of opinions on a variety of perspectives, a number of scientists were 
asked to submit essays on what they considered to be important considerations for the long term 
regarding those perspectives. These essays can be found at 
https://www.rijksoverheid.nl/onderwerpen/klimaatverandering/documenten. They are: 
•  De burger en het klimaat- en energiebeleid: een doorkijk naar 2050 (Citizens and the climate and 
energy policy: a look ahead to 2050), C. Carabain and Y. de Kluizenaar, SCP, 2019 
•  Van waslijst naar wensbeeld (From a wish list to a vision), H. de Coninck, Radboud University, 
2019 
•  Alles draait om adequate datagovernance (It's all about adequate data governance), R. van Est 
and R. Dekker, Rathenau Institute, 2019 
•  Een duurzaam verdienmodel voor 2050 (A sustainable earnings model for 2050), R. Gerlagh, 
Tilburg University, 2019 
•  Kijken in een spiegel van de toekomst (Looking into the mirror of the future), C. van der Linde, 
CIEP, Clingendael, 2019 
•  De energietransitie door een complexiteitsbril (The energy transition through a  complexity 
lens), P. Sloot , R. Kupers and B. van der Zwaan, Institute for Advanced Studies, University of 
Amsterdam, 2019 
 
Other sources 
Below is a list of the main studies and policy documents that were been used: 
17 
 •  AIV, 2019, Briefadvies Internationaal Klimaatbeleid (Advisory letter on international climate 
policy) 
•  Berenschot, 2018, Richting 2050: systeemkeuzes en afhankelijkheden in de energietransitie 
(Towards 2050: system choices and dependencies in the energy transition) 
•  Berenschot, 2018, Elektronen en/of Moleculen (Electrons and/or molecules) 
•  CPB, 2011, Analyse routekaart 2050 (Analysis of the 2050 roadmap)  
•  CPB/PBL, 2015, Nederland in 2030-2050: twee referentiescenario's – Toekomstverkenning 
Welvaart en Leefomgeving (WLO) (The Netherlands in 2030–2050: Two reference scenarios – 
an exploratory study into welfare, prosperity and the human environment) 
•  CIEP, 2019, Van onzichtbare naar meer zichtbare hand? Waterstof en elektriciteit: naar een 
nieuwe ruggengraat voor het energiesysteem (From an invisible to a more visible hand? 
Hydrogen and electricity: towards a new energy system backbone) 
•  CRa, 2019, Via Parijs – een ontwerpverkenning naar een klimaatneutraal Nederland (By way of 
Paris: an exploratory design study into a climate-neutral Netherlands)  
•  De Gemeijnt, 2018, Routekaart CCS (CCS roadmap) 
•  European Commission, 2018, A Clean Planet for all – A European strategic long-term vision for 
a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate-neutral economy  
•  Gasunie/EBN, 2017, Transport en opslag van CO  in Nederland (Transport and storage of CO  
2 2
in the Netherlands) 
•  IEA, 2019, The future of hydrogen 
•  KVS, 2018, Preadviezen 2018: Klimaatbeleid: kosten, kansen en keuzes (Preliminary advice 
2018 on climate policy: costs, opportunities and choices) 
•  Ministry of the Interior and Kingdom Relations, 2019, draft National Strategy on Spatial 
Planning and Environment 
•  Ministry of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy, 2019, Samen werken aan een duurzaam en 
ondernemend Nederland (Working together on a sustainable and enterprising Netherlands) 
(internal publication) 
•  Ministry of Infrastructure and Water Management, 2019, Schets Mobiliteit naar 2040 veilig, 
robuust, duurzaam (Mobility outline towards 2040: safe, robust, sustainable) 
•  Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality, 2018, Landbouw, natuur en voedsel: 
waardevol en verbonden (Agriculture, nature and food: valuable and connected) 
•  PBL, 2011, Naar een schone economie in 2050 – routes verkend (Towards a clean economy in 
2050: an exploration of routes) 
•  PBL, 2016, Opties voor energie en klimaatbeleid – vormgeving van de energietransitie (Energy 
and climate policy options: shaping the energy transition) 
•  PBL, 2017, Kostenanalyse klimaatdoelen (Climate targets cost analysis) 
•  PBL, 2017, Verkenning van klimaatdoelen; Van lange termijn beelden naar korte termijn actie 
(Exploration of climate goals: from long-term vision to short-term action) 
•  PBL, 2018, Nationale kosten klimaat- en energietransitie in 2030 (National costs of the climate 
and energy transition in 2030) – 2018 update 
•  PBL, 2018, Negatieve emissies - Technisch potentieel, realistisch potentieel en kosten voor 
Nederland (Negative emissions: technical potential, realistic potential and costs to the 
Netherlands) 
•  PBL, 2019, Effecten ontwerp Klimaatakkoord (Effects of the draft Climate Agreement) 
•  PBL, 2019, Oefenen met de toekomst, Ruimtelijke Verkenning 2019 (Practising with the future: 
2019 spatial survey) 
•  Quintel Intelligence, 2017, De toekomst van de Nederlandse industrie – het verhaal (The future 
of Dutch industry: a narrative) 
•  SCP, 2016, Social and cultural report 2016 
•  Tennet/Gasunie, 2019, Infrastructure Outlook 2050 
•  TKI New Gas, 2018, Contouren van een Routekaart Waterstof (Outlines of a hydrogen 
roadmap) 
•  VEMW, 2017, Decisions on the industrial energy transition  
•  WRR, 2016, Klimaatbeleid voor de lange termijn: van vrijblijvend naar verankerd (Climate 
policy for the long term: from non-binding to binding) 
 
18 
 Appendix 2. Long-term strategy elements in the EU Regulation 
The EU Regulation on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action (EU 2018/1999) 
contains an obligation to draw up a national long-term strategy and specifies elements that should 
be included in such a strategy. Annex IV of the Regulation serves as a format for a table of 
contents. The government has elected not to adopt this format, but to use its own approach. For 
ease of reference and for convenience of comparison with the long-term strategies of other 
Member States, this appendix summarises how the Netherlands has interpreted the elements in 
the format and a number of other elements mentioned in the Regulation, referring primarily to 
sources other than this document. 'NECP' refers to the Integrated National Energy and Climate 
Plan, which was drawn up at the same time as this long-term strategy in conformity with the 
obligation in Article 3 of the Regulation. There are no national prognoses available beyond 2030, as 
the exogenous and policy uncertainties are such that a scenario study would be more suitable. In 
order to give an idea of the period after 2030, the NECP contains the key outcomes of the welfare, 
prosperity and human environment scenarios (Welvaart- en Leefomgevingsscenario's, WLO) drawn 
up by the Netherlands Bureau for Economic Policy Analysis (CPB) and the Netherlands 
Environmental Assessment Agency (PBL) in 2015. For obvious reasons, these outcomes do not take 
into account more recent developments and policies. 
 
Element in the Regulation  Dutch interpretation 
(The numbers refer to Annex IV or Article 15) 
1.1.   Summary  Chapter 2 offers a summary overview of the 
Netherlands' current long-term policy. 
Chapter 4 contains a summary of the strategic 
challenges that require additional policies. 
1.2.   Legal and policy context  See Chapter 1. 
1.3.   Public consultation  See Appendix 1. 
2.1.1.   Projected emission reductions and  See NECP 4.2.1 for the available data.  
enhancement of removals by 2050 
2.1.2.   National target for 2030 and beyond, if  2030 targets:  
available, and indicative milestones for 2040 
•  -49% greenhouse gas emissions 
and 2050 
compared to 1990. 
•  -36% greenhouse gas emissions by 
non-ETS sectors compared to 2005 
(target in the Effort Sharing Regulation 
[ESR]). 
•  No worsening of the emissions and 
sinks balance in land use (target in the 
LULUCF Regulation). 
2050 target:  
•  -95% greenhouse gas emissions 
compared to 1990.  
2.1.3.   Adaptation policies and measures  The climate adaptation policy has been laid 
down in the National Climate Adaptation 
Strategy (NAS) 2016 and the NAS 
Implementation Programme. 
19 
 2.2.1.   To the extent feasible, the estimated  See NECP 4.2.2 for the available data. 
likely share of renewable energy in final energy 
consumption by 2050 
2.3.1.   To the extent feasible, the estimated  See NECP 4.3.2 for the available data.  
likely energy consumption by 2050 
2.4.1.1.   Energy system: intended or likely  Planned: 2050 target of a 100% CO -free 
2
future emissions trajectory or range  electricity supply; for the 2030 target, see 
NECP 2.1.1. 
Likely trajectories: see NECP 4.2.1. 
2.4.1.2.   Energy system: general description of  See NECP 4.1, 4.3. 
main drivers for energy efficiency, demand-side 
flexibility and energy consumption and their 
evolution from 2021 and beyond 
2.4.2.1.   Industry: expected emission  See NECP 4.2.1, 4.2.2. 
reductions by sector and energy demands 
2.4.2.2.   Industry: overview of policies  See Section C3 in the Climate Agreement. 
2.4.3.1.   Transport: expected emissions and  See NECP 4.2.1, 4.2.2. 
energy sources by transport type (e.g. cars and 
vans, heavy duty road transport, shipping, 
aviation, rail) 
2.4.3.2.   Transport: decarbonisation options  See Sections 2.8.4 and 3.7.4 in the 2017 PBL 
report 'Exploration of climate goals'. 
2.4.4.1.   Agriculture and land use: to the  See NECP 4.2.1. 
extent feasible, expected emissions by sources 
and by individual GHGs 
2.4.4.2.   Agriculture and land use: emission  See Sections 2.8.5 and 3.7.5 in the 2017 PBL 
reduction options envisaged  report 'Exploration of climate goals'. 
2.4.4.3.   Links to agricultural and rural  See Section C4 in the Climate Agreement. 
development policies 
3.1.   Estimates of investment needed  See NECP 5.3. 
3.2.   Policies and measures for related  See Section D3 in the Climate Agreement for 
research, development and innovation  the Integrated Knowledge and Innovation 
Agenda. 
5. Impact assessment of the socio-economic  See NECP 5.2 for the available data. 
aspects 
5.1.   Details on modelling (including  See NECP, Appendix 2. 
assumptions) and/or analysis, indicators, etc.  
20 
 Article 15.4.d. To the extent feasible, expected  See NECP 5.2 for the available data. 
socio-economic effect of the decarbonisation 
measures, including, inter alia, aspects related 
to macro-economic and social development, 
health risks as well as benefits and 
environmental protection 
Article 15.4.e. Links to other national long-term  See the National interests section in the draft 
objectives, planning and other policies and  National Strategy on Spatial Planning and 
measures, and investments  Environment for a description of the policies 
regarding the physical living environment, 
including an explanation of/references to 
existing policy. 
 
 
21 
 