Pursuant to Article 109 of the Rules of Procedure of the National Assembly (Official 
Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia [Uradni list RS], Nos. 92/07– official consolidated text, 
105/10,  80/13,  38/17,  46/20  and  105/21  –  Constitutional  Court  Decision),  the  National 
Assembly adopted at its session on 13 July 2021 the following 
 
 
R E S O L U T I O N 
 
ON SLOVENIA’S LONG-TERM CLIMATE STRATEGY UNTIL 2050 (ReDPS50) 
 
 
 
1  INTRODUCTION 
 
With  the  Resolution  on  Slovenia’s  Long-Term  Climate  Strategy  Until  2050  (hereinafter: 
Climate Strategy) being adopted to implement paragraph one of Article 15 of Regulation (EU) 
2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the 
Governance  of  the  Energy  Union  and  Climate  Action,  amending  Regulations  (EC)  No 
663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Directives 
94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of 
the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC and (EU) 
2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1), the Republic of Slovenia sets a clear objective, i.e. to 
attain net zero emissions or climate neutrality by 2050.By setting the climate objective, the 
Climate Strategy is determining the goal of attaining net zero emissions by 2050 to other 
sectors and their sectoral policies. It also sets the strategic sectoral objectives for 2040 and 
2050, which individual sectors must observe consistently and incorporate in their sectoral 
documents and plans. 
 
Because  the  Climate  Strategy  is  a  commitment  and  a  task  of  all  ministries,  the  entire 
government and the country as a whole, immediate implementation of the already adopted 
policies  and  measures  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions  (hereinafter:  GHG),  their 
upgrade and the suspension and adoption of policies and measures that are contrary to the 
reduction in GHG emissions is essential in all competent sectors. 
 
 
2  STRUCTURE 
 
For the period up to 2030, the document is based on the already adopted decisions defined 
in Slovenia’s Development Strategy 2030 (hereinafter: SDS 2030), the Integrated National 
Energy and Climate Plan of the Republic of Slovenia (hereinafter: NECP), the Resolution on 
the National Programme for the Development of Transport of the Republic of Slovenia until 
2030 (Official Gazette of the Republic of Slovenia [Uradni list RS], No. 75/16; hereinafter: 
ReNPRP30), the Resolution on the National Environmental Action Programme 2020–2030 
(Official  Gazette  of  the  Republic  of  Slovenia  [Uradni  list  RS],  No.  31/20;  hereinafter: 
ReNPVO20-30) and other sectoral documents. The Climate Strategy upgrades the relevant 
documents, sets the vision and long-term objectives by 2050 and provides the guidelines for 
its attainment. 
 
The Climate Strategy is a strategic document and does not contain specific measures. The 
action plan for implementing the Climate Strategy by 2030 is the NECP. The documents 
were drafted in coordination and based on the same expert bases. 
 
The guidelines in the Climate Strategy were provided on the basis of projections in the expert 
bases that analyse possible approaches for the attainment of the objectives based on certain 
assumptions. The projections observe the state of technologies, the expected development 
  1 and information when drafting the projections. Based on the foregoing, the projections of the 
economic development, energy prices, technology prices and assumptions regarding the 
implementation of measures were formed. 
Written guidelines indicate the path towards climate neutrality by 2050 while bearing in mind 
that these may also change in the given unpredictable situations. An example of such a 
situation is the impact of the COVID-19 epidemic, which was not observed in the projections 
as the latter were drafted before the onset of the epidemic. 
 
For  the  most  part,  the  guidelines  were  recorded  as  technologically  neutral  because 
technological development may significantly change the price ratios and the applicability of 
individual technologies for attaining decarbonisation. 
 
 
3  STARTING POINTS 
 
3.1  Legal framework and starting points 
 
The Climate Strategy observes the commitments of the Paris Agreement (Official Gazette of 
the Republic of Slovenia [Uradni list RS], International Treaties, Nos. 16/16 and 6/17 – 
amended; hereinafter: Paris Agreement) and was drafted in compliance with the Framework 
of Slovenia’s Long-Term Climate Policy "Slovenia and A Healthy Planet" and Regulation (EU) 
2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the 
Governance  of  the  Energy  Union  and  Climate  Action,  amending  Regulations  (EC)  No 
663/2009 and (EC) No 715/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council, Directives 
94/22/EC, 98/70/EC, 2009/31/EC, 2009/73/EC, 2010/31/EU, 2012/27/EU and 2013/30/EU of 
the European Parliament and of the Council, Council Directives 2009/119/EC and (EU) 
2015/652 and repealing Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 1), last amended by Commission Delegated Regulation 
(EU) 2020/1044 of 8 May 2020 supplementing Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council with regard to values for global warming potentials and the 
inventory  guidelines  and  with  regard  to  the  Union  inventory  system  and  repealing 
Commission  Delegated  Regulation  (EU)  No  666/2014  (OJ  L  230,  17.7.2020,  p.  1) 
(hereinafter: Regulation (EU) 2018/1999). 
 
The Paris Agreement, concluded in December 2015 and applicable since 4 November 2016, 
is the first universal and legally binding global climate agreement concluded between nation 
states. By ratifying and implementing the Paris Agreement (Slovenia ratified it in November 
2016), the international community undertook to keep global warming below 2°C compared 
to the pre-industrial era and to limit global warming to 1.5°C. For the first time, the Paris 
Agreement defines in a legally binding manner the importance of enhancing the resilience 
and reducing the vulnerability of countries to the impact of climate change while ensuring 
financial  flows  to  reduce  GHG  emissions  and  for  the  climate-resilient  development  of 
countries,  which  also  coincides  with  the  objective  of  the  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable 
Development. Following the adoption of the Climate Strategy, Slovenia will forward it to the 
European Commission (hereinafter: EC) and the United Nations Framework Convention on 
Climate Change (hereinafter: UNFCCC). 
 
 
3.2  Principles, vision and guidelines 
 
3.2.1 Principles 
 
The Climate Strategy is based on the principles of reducing GHG emissions, efficient energy 
use  and  energy  consumption  reduction,  climate  justice,  just  transition  and  scientific 
advances.  The  objectives  and  measures  are  founded  on  the  latest  and  internationally 
acknowledged  scientific  findings  and  are  based  on  the  principles  of  the  act  governing 
  2 environmental protection, which incorporates the main principles of sustainable development, 
integration,  cooperation,  prevention,  precaution  and  the  polluter-pays  principle.  Other 
incorporated principles also include the principle of competition, the principle of respecting 
sectoral  objectives  to  facilitate  the  integration  of  sectoral  policies,  the  principle  of  cost 
effectiveness, the principle of ensuring Slovenia’s active role in the international community 
and the principle of habitat conservation, which are important for biodiversity conservation 
and the condition of which is also worsening due to climate change, and the principle of 
cultural heritage conservation. 
 
Realisation of the Climate Strategy promotes measures and the development of technologies 
that have a positive impact on biodiversity or those that impact it the least. 
 
 
3.2.2 Vision 
 
In 2050, Slovenia will be a climate-neutral and resilient society based on sustainable 
development. It will efficiently manage energy and natural resources, and simultaneously 
maintain a high level of competition in a low-carbon circular economy. The society will be 
based on well-preserved nature, the circular economy, renewable and low-carbon energy 
sources, sustainable mobility and healthy locally-produced food. 
 
It will be well-adjusted and resilient to the impact of climate change. Slovenia will be a 
society in which the quality and safety of life will be high, and the opportunity arising from 
the altered climate conditions will also be exploited. 
 
The transition to a climate neutral society will be inclusive and the principles of climate 
justice will also be observed. The costs and benefits of the transition will be distributed in a 
fair  way  due  to  the  most  vulnerable  groups  of  citizens  being  enabled  to  implement 
mitigation and adaptation measures. 
 
The attainment of climate neutrality means that Slovenia will achieve net zero emissions by 
2050, which means that removals of emissions will be balanced with an equivalent amount of 
anthropogenic GHG emissions. The removals include sinks in the sector of land use, land 
use change and forestry (hereinafter: LULUCF) and direct capture of GHG emissions. 
 
The Climate Strategy is founded on analytical bases which reveal that Slovenia can attain 
climate neutrality by 2050 with the technologies known and tested today and numerous other 
measures. Based on the analysed scenarios (presented in more detail in the expert bases), 
Slovenia can attain climate neutrality by means of at least two scenarios, i.e. the ambitious 
nuclear scenario (hereinafter: WAM NU) and the ambitious scenario with the use of synthetic 
natural gas (hereinafter: WAM SNG). 
 
Slovenia  is  already  intensively  developing,  monitoring  and  investing  in  research,  new 
technologies and development in order to form final solutions for reaching the objective of 
climate neutrality and it will also continue to do so in the future. 
 
An important element of the climate-neutral transition is the inclusion, as early as possible, of 
the  interested  and  expert  public,  which  contributes  to  the  quality  of  regulations  and 
programmes, the fulfilment of obligations and the reduction of costs for their implementation. 
 
The Climate Strategy incorporates guidelines for the sectors responsible for most GHG 
emissions. The sectors are classified in accordance with the methodology of the International 
Panel on Climate Change (hereinafter: IPCC) unless determined otherwise. Attainment of the 
objective  of  the  climate-neutral  society  adapted  to  climate  changes  requires  radical 
alterations in the economy and society, which will occur over a period of one generation. 
Numerous technological and social innovations throughout the entirety of society will be 
  3 necessary. Many opportunities will arise for Slovenia from the transformation into a climate 
neutral  society  that  such  a  transformation  will  generate  for  individuals,  society  and  the 
economy. Slovenia will make use of these opportunities resulting from climate change or 
changed  environment  (e.g.  extended  growing  seasons  of  plants).  Its  size,  favourable 
educational  structure  and  well-preserved  nature  will  be  used  in  favour  of  an  efficient, 
competitive, inclusive and sustainable transition to a climate neutral society. 
 
3.2.3 Guidelines 
 
The  main  guideline  being  realised  by  the  Climate  Strategy  is  the  reduction  of  GHG 
emissions. The horizontal guidelines applicable for all sectors also include greater material 
efficiency,  promotion  of  low-carbon  resources,  energy  efficiency,  sustainable  spatial 
development, sustainable construction, promotion of digitalisation and public administration 
setting an example. Slovenia will not adopt policies and measures and will not invest funds in 
a manner which would contravene the commitments of the Paris Agreement. The horizontal 
guidelines also include the fact that in addition to climate change we are also experiencing a 
biodiversity crisis, which is why synergies between both have to be sought when looking for 
solutions. Any activities in the environment must be carried out with a minimum impact on the 
environment. 
 
To enhance the integration of climate policy in sectoral policies, Slovenia will improve the 
verification  of  compliance  of  documents,  policies,  regulations  and  other  acts  regarding 
climate policy and further strengthen this component in the procedure of comprehensive 
environmental  impact  assessment  (hereinafter:  CEIA)  or  the  environmental  impact 
assessment (hereinafter: EIA). The criteria for assessing document compliance with the 
policy of climate change adaptation and mitigation will also be prepared. 
 
Other guidelines are discussed in individual chapters. 
 
 
3.3  Public consultation 
 
In the beginning of November 2019, an online consultation was published regarding the 
preparation of Slovenia’s Climate Strategy. Interested stakeholders were invited to participate 
in  the  formation  of  the  Climate  Strategy.  Some  159  individuals  and  organisations  (98 
individuals and 61 organisations among which 30 were non-governmental organisations) 
attended the online consultation. The responses received were peer reviewed and observed 
accordingly in the draft Climate Strategy. 
 
Public discussion of the document took place between 1 September 2020 and 30 September 
2020. More than 400 comments were submitted, which were peer reviewed and incorporated 
in  the  Strategy  as  appropriate.  Two  public  presentations  of  the  draft  document  or 
communication workshops were also carried out during the public discussion, which were 
intended for additional consultation and dialogue regarding specific strategy content. The 
public presentations took place on 18 September 2020 (presentation for broader public) and 
25 September 2020 (presentation for the business sector at the Chamber of Commerce and 
Industry of Slovenia). Due to public assembly restrictions during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
the option was provided to watch both presentations online and ask questions. 
 
Before the Strategy was designed, several workshops with different stakeholders were held 
within the LIFE Climate Path 2050 project for the preparation of analytical bases of the 
Climate Strategy. 
 
 
 
 
  4 3.4  Analysis of the situation and scientific advances relating to climate change in 
Slovenia 
 
Exceptionally fast climate changes, which we have witnessed in particular in the last four 
decades, have had a significant impact on the situation and trends in other vital natural 
systems. Due to the long lifetime of GHG, the current climate changes will be expressed 
even more intensively and frequently in the coming decades. 
 
In the 1961–2011 period, the most prominent climate change in Slovenia was the increase in 
mean air temperature (by approximately 0.36°C per decade). Temperature began to increase 
very sharply in the mid-1980s (Figure 1). Between 1961 and 2019, the mean air temperature 
increased by some 2°C in Slovenia. In the same period, surface water temperature increased 
by 0.2°C per decade. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Deviation of the mean annual air temperature from the long-term average for 
Slovenia 1981–2010. Blue columns mark the years with negative and red columns the years 
with positive mean deviation from the 30-year average 1981–2010. The black curve shows 
the smoothed deviation average (source: the ARSO). 
 
 
 
Inter-annual precipitation variability is much higher than inter-annual temperature variability, 
which is why possible changes in precipitation are more difficult to detect and prove. In the 
1961–2011  period,  precipitation  in  the  western  half  of  the  country  reduced  statistically 
significantly by up to 20 per cent and the trend in precipitation decrease has stopped at the 
national level in the last decade (Figure 2). The snow cover in the highlands and high 
mountains reduced significantly as well, halving in the last sixty years. Water evaporation, 
which  is  measured  by  means  of  the  reference  evapotranspiration,  also  increased.  This 
represents all water that evaporates through the reference vegetation cover (grass) if the 
water  supply  in  the  surface  layer  of  soil  is  sufficient  throughout.  The  reference 
evapotranspiration increased the most in spring and summer, and the linear trend amounted 
to between 3 and 6 per cent per decade at the annual level in the 1961–2011 period. 
  5  
 
Figure 2: Deviation of the mean annual precipitation from the long-term average for Slovenia 
1981–2010. Brown columns mark the years with negative and green columns the years with 
positive mean deviation from the 30-year average 1981–2010. The black curve shows the 
smoothed deviation average (source: the ARSO). 
 
 
 
Climate change detected by means of measurements in the past six decades will continue in 
the coming decades. The scope of the forthcoming change also depends on the success of 
policies for limiting GHG emissions. 
 
The air temperature will continue to rise in any case in Slovenia until the end of the century. 
In the event of the optimistic emissions scenario (RCP2.6), the temperature will increase on 
average by an additional 1.3°C by the end of the century if compared to the 1981–2010 
period; in the event of the moderately optimistic emissions scenario (RCP4.5), it will increase 
by an additional 2°C, and in the event of the most pessimistic emissions scenario (RCP8.5), 
the temperature will increase by an additional 4.1°C (Figure 3) with regard to the already 
measured temperature increases in the period up to 2010. 
 
The rise in temperature will severely increase the heat load, especially in summer. The 
frequency,  intensity  and  duration  of  heat  waves  will  increase.  With  the  increase  in 
temperature, the surface layer of soil will heat up, too, and that will affect the phenological 
development of plants, which will be early, and the length of growing period, which will be 
prolonged. The frequency of spring frost will remain at a similar level as in the current 
climate. 
 
The temperature of surface water will increase in accordance with the air temperature. In the 
event of the optimistic scenario (RCP2.6), the temperature of surface water will increase by 
about 0.5°C by the end of the century in comparison with the 1981–2010 period; in the event 
of the moderately optimistic emissions scenario (RCP4.5), it will increase by about 1°C and in 
the event of the most pessimistic emissions scenario (RCP8.5), the temperature will increase 
by more than 2°C. 
  6  
Figure 3: Timeline of the change in the mean annual air temperature in Slovenia by the end of 
the 21st century, including deviation ranges. Deviation of the mean in the 1981–2010 period is 
displayed (source: ARSO). 
 
 
 
Although measurements reveal a decline in precipitation on the annual level (Figure 2), all 
models of scenarios show that the trend will reverse in the coming decades. In the event of 
all emissions scenarios, mean annual precipitation will have increased by up to 20 per cent 
by the end of the century if compared with the 1981–2010 period. For the most part, this 
increase will be the result of an increase in winter precipitation which will be more prominent 
in the eastern part of the country. Already by mid-century, winter precipitation is predicted to 
increase by 40 per cent in eastern Slovenia and by 15 per cent at the national level. In the 
event of the pessimistic emissions scenario (RCP8.5), there will be up to 60 per cent more 
precipitation in the east and up to 40 per cent at the national level (Figure 4) by the end of the 
century. In the remaining seasons, all changes will be within the limits of natural rainfall 
variability. The indicators of extreme precipitation reveal that the intensity and frequency of 
extreme precipitation events will increase, which will be most prominent in the event of the 
pessimistic emissions scenario (RCP8.5). An increase in temperature must be added to the 
increase in intensity and frequency of extreme precipitation events, which means that there 
will be less precipitation in the form of snowfall resulting in lower water retention in the cold 
part of the year. The risk of torrential floods and landslides will also increase due to greater 
precipitation intensity. 
  7  
 
Figure 4: Timeline of the change in winter precipitation in Slovenia by the end of the 21st century, 
including deviation ranges. Relative quantity as per the mean in the 1981–2010 period is displayed 
(source: ARSO). 
 
 
 
An increase in reference evapotranspiration will continue in Slovenia in accordance with the 
increase in air temperature by the end of the century. In the event of the moderately optimistic 
emissions  scenario  (RCP4.5),  the  reference  evapotranspiration  will  increase  by  8  per cent  if 
compared to the 1981–2010 period and it will increase by 16 per cent in the event of the most 
pessimistic emissions scenario (RCP8.5). The intensity and frequency of droughts will increase 
due  to  accelerated  evaporation  and  a  changed  precipitation  regime.  Drought  is  a  complex 
phenomenon displayed at several levels (meteorological, agricultural, hydrological). We frequently 
detect an exceptional lack of rainfall (meteorological drought) and drought in the surface layer of 
the soil (agricultural drought), while we do not notice a significant deviation from normal conditions 
in watercourses and groundwater reserves. On the contrary, a precipitation event may immediately 
improve the condition of the surface layer of soil which retains the majority of rainfall after a longer 
dry  period,  while  watercourses  and  aquifers  remain  dry.  Despite  an  increase  in  annual 
precipitation, problems will occur in the future, particularly regarding short-term, but extremely 
severe droughts in the surface layer of soil. Such droughts will be the result of a longer gap 
between precipitation events, and they will be accompanied by extremely high temperatures in the 
warm part of the year. Major escalation of drought conditions is not expected on rivers, but the flow 
regime of rivers will change. Rainfall intensity after extensive drought periods will increase, which 
will  fill  up  watercourses  and  groundwater  reserves.  Sufficient  and  even  increased  winter 
precipitation will also fill up watercourses. River flows will also increase additionally in winter due to 
a  lower  proportion  of  snow  which  represents  a  natural  water  retainer.  As  a  result,  this  will 
significantly increase the risk of flooding in winter. Groundwater recharge will also increase due to 
the expected increase in winter precipitation. According to the projections, low flow rates will 
change significantly, i.e. they will increase in the second half of the century, but only on the 
watercourses in eastern Slovenia and those flowing into the Sava River in its middle section. 
 
Slovenia is considered a country rich in water sources and the climate projections reveal that it will 
remain as such in the future. Precipitation will increase in the cold half of the year when the need 
for water is not great. Simultaneously, the impact of snow cover, which is a natural water retainer, 
will be greatly reduced. So, less water will be available, particularly in the surface layer of soil and 
surface  watercourses  at  the  beginning  of  the  vegetation  period  when  evaporation  will  also 
increase. Despite an increase in annual precipitation, Slovenia will experience drought in the 
surface  layer  of  soil  in  the  warm  part  of  the  year.  The  relevant  changes  will  also  affect 
groundwater, the restoration of its dynamics and the drinking water supply. The thusly altered 
  8 water and river regime and an increased heat load will be the most important effects of future 
climate change, which will directly and indirectly affect activities such as health care, agriculture, 
forestry, energy, manufacturing and tourism. 
 
 
3.5  Situation of GHG emissions in Slovenia in 2018 
 
Total GHG emissions in Slovenia amounted to 17,502 kt of CO  equivalent (excluding the LULUCF 
2
sector) in 2018 and were somewhat higher than the year before. Slovenia has set binding targets 
for  2020  only  for  GHG  emissions  which  are  not  included  in  the  emissions  trading  scheme 
(hereinafter: non-ETS) and these objectives will likely be attained. The objectives for the non-ETS 
sectors were set at the time when no broad political consensus on firmer action against the global 
climate  crisis  existed,  which  means  that  Slovenia  is  currently  not  managing  the  long-term 
emissions trajectory. A cause for concern is particularly the growth in GHG emissions in transport. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Sector shares in total GHG emissions for 2018 (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef 
Stefan Institute) 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Quantity of emissions by sectors in different years (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of 
Jožef Stefan Institute) 
 
 
3.6  Guidelines for biodiversity protection for mitigating and adapting to climate 
change 
 
Processes of climate change, which endanger all living beings in a way not yet experienced, warn 
us that we are part of nature and highlight the importance of their protection. The latest findings of 
  9 the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES), 
i.e. the Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem 
services (pp. 12–13, A.2.), and the European Environment Agency (The European Environment – 
State and Outlook 2020) point out that the crisis in the field of biodiversity is inherently connected 
to the climate crisis. Climate changes accelerate the occurrence of frequent drought, flooding and 
wildfires in nature. The loss of the natural environment and its unsustainable exploitation are the 
key negative factors of climate change. Nature is also the key factor in the combat against climate 
change because it regulates climate and provides solutions that incorporate the conservation and 
restoration of wetlands, peatlands and coastal ecosystems, sustainable management of marine 
areas, sustainable management of forests, grassland and agricultural land, which are important 
measures for the adjustment to climate change and the reduction of GHG emissions. 
 
Political specifications in global objectives of preserving biodiversity in the European Green Deal 
(hereinafter: EGD) and in the ReNPVO20-30 at the national level emphasise the significance of 
biodiversity for climate change adaptation. Furthermore, preserved biodiversity also contributes to 
their mitigation. The importance of maintaining biodiversity is recognised in the light of adapting to 
climate change and is also incorporated in national strategies and planning policies of other 
sectors, such as agriculture and forestry, but less in others, which will have to be upgraded. 
 
Climate change and biodiversity decline are two inseparable processes that have to be considered 
together. Climate change has a severe negative impact on biodiversity and thus the stability of 
ecosystems,  which  also  affects  people’s  health  and  well-being.  Their  solutions  are  also 
intertwined, which is why these two inseparable processes must be discussed in unison. Nature is 
our  key  ally  in  the  combat  against  climate  change  because  well-preserved  ecosystems  and 
subsequent ecosystem services can contribute significantly to the adjustment to, and mitigation of, 
climate change. 
 
 
3.6.1 Situation and challenges to preserve biodiversity 
 
Biodiversity means the variability of living organisms on the genetic, species and ecosystemic 
levels. Its conservation is implemented by means of ecosystem and natural habitat protection, 
preservation of landscape characteristics, and the maintenance and enhancement of populations 
which are capable of continuing the development of species in their natural environment. The 
Natura 2000 Network is crucial for ensuring the habitats of species endangered at the EU level. 
Almost 38 per cent of Slovenia’s territory is included in the Natura 2000 Network, which is the 
largest share among all EU member states. Biodiversity is declining in Slovenia despite the 
measures implemented for its preservation (the 2017 Environmental Report of the Republic of 
Slovenia). 
 
The condition of important European species and habitat types, whose habitat is agricultural 
landscape, is worsening in the lowlands due to accelerated agriculture and the abandonment of 
land use in hilly and remote areas. Many habitat types linked to water, including wetlands, are also 
poorly preserved. The condition of forests is relatively good, including certain typical species living 
in  them  (e.g.  wolf,  bear).  Exceptions  to  this  are  specific  species  with  specialised  ecological 
requirements and minority habitat types (e.g. in lowland flooded forests). The 2017 Environmental 
Report states that construction with urbanisation and industrialisation, transport and agriculture 
acceleration are among the salient and recorded pressures upon, and threats to, the species and 
habitat types in Slovenia that are important for Europe. Climate change and the spread of invasive 
alien species further worsen the situation. Very similar findings also arise from the Report on the 
Conservation Status of Habitat Types and Species as per Article 17 of the Habitats Directive for 
the 2013–2018 period (Council Directive 92/43/EEC of 21 May 1992 on the conservation of natural 
habitats and of wild fauna and flora (OJ L 206, 22.7.1992, p. 7)). The Natura 2000 protected areas 
represent living and changing areas, which is why it is reasonable to implement an expert revision 
of determining or changing these areas with the objective to particularly protect areas where this is 
scientifically justified and to ensure their efficient management. 
  10  
The  research  reveals  that  climate  change  impacts  the  spread  of  invasive  alien  species  by 
generating more hospitable conditions for such species due to extreme weather phenomena and 
an increased accessibility of certain areas to people. Forests and their biodiversity, functions and 
ecosystem services are exposed to greater risks due to climate change, such as wildfires, extreme 
weather events, increased spread of invasive alien species, diseases and pests. Broader analyses 
of the contribution of individual habitats to retaining GHG in connection with their conservation 
status have not yet been implemented in Slovenia. 
 
Climate change also has a negative impact on pollinators, which has severe consequences for 
biodiversity and the provision of food safety. Climate change significantly affects marine and 
coastal ecosystems because it causes ocean warming and acidification, and oxygen depletion. 
 
3.6.2 Implementation of measures for conserving biodiversity to mitigate and adapt 
to climate change 
 
The measures to preserve biodiversity are recognised globally and at the EU level as measures 
that specifically contribute to the mitigation of, and the adaptation to, climate change. These are 
the measures for improving the status of biodiversity in forests, wetlands, grasslands and water 
and waterside lands. Some examples include measures for the removal of invasive alien species, 
renaturation of wetlands and water areas, leaving sections of forests to undergo natural processes, 
and  extensive  mowing  while  observing  target  species  or  habitat  types.  These  measures 
simultaneously contribute to increased carbon retention and prevention of GHG emissions, for 
which the terms of natural climate solutions or nature based solutions are used. According to the 
latest assessments, natural climate solutions can make up 37 per cent of cost-efficient prevention 
of CO  emissions by 2030 and thus contribute significantly to the attainment of the objectives of 
2
the Paris Agreement. 
 
The  2030  Agenda  for  Sustainable  Development  cites  objectives  2,  11,  13,  14  in  15  as  the 
objectives  most  connected  to  the  adjustment  to  climate  change  (EEA  Report  No.  1/2017). 
Objectives 14 and 15 focus on the conservation and sustainable use of seas and inland water 
ecosystems. In particular, objective 15 highlights the halt of biodiversity loss by means of the 
protection, restoration and promotion of sustainable ecosystem use. 
 
To preserve biodiversity and related ecosystem services, the Strategic Plan for Biodiversity 2011–
2020 incorporates measures to improve and restore at least 15 per cent of degraded ecosystems 
and explicitly states the related contribution to the mitigation of, and the adaptation to, climate 
change (Aichi Target 15). Aichi Target 10 is also linked directly to the mitigation of climate change 
and calls on the state parties to reduce as much as possible the anthropogenic pressures on coral 
reefs  and  other  vulnerable  ecosystems  which  are  affected  by  climate  change  or  ocean 
acidification, so that their integrity and functioning will be preserved. 
 
The foregoing global commitments are also summarised in Target 2 of the EU Biodiversity Strategy 
to 2020 and in the Action Plan for nature, people and the economy (actions 5, 6 and 10). 
 
The  EU  Biodiversity  Strategy  for  2030  determines  a  number  of  specific  commitments  and 
measures for protection and restoration of nature and degraded ecosystems in the EU by 2030 
and their sustainable management, especially  of those with the greatest potential for carbon 
capture and storage and the prevention and reduction of the impact of natural disasters. Among 
other measures, the Strategy proposes an increase in the proportion of protected areas on land 
and at sea, binding objectives for restoration of damaged ecosystems and rivers, improvement of 
the conservation status of protected habitats, species and pollinators on agricultural land, pollution 
reduction, greening of cities, promotion of organic farming and other nature-friendly agricultural 
practices and the improvement of the condition of European forests. High biodiversity, healthy 
ecosystems, ecosystem services and nature-based solutions can contribute significantly to greater 
resilience against climate change. 
  11  
According to the latest assessments, climate change negatively affects 14 per cent of habitats and 
13 per cent species in Europe (EEA Report, No. 1/2017). The impact is expected to double in the 
near future. Due to climate change, many species in the Natura 2000 network are said to lose 
suitable climate niches. The effects of climate change on the European biodiversity are already 
displayed in different ways, e.g. by changed species distribution, changes in plant development 
cycles, shorter hibernation periods and changed animal migration patterns. There is insufficient 
data regarding the impact of climate change on species and habitats in Slovenia because the 
study of these effects is in the initial phase. The possible impact of climate change on certain 
species  and  habitats  was  examined  only  exceptionally  in  the  territory  of  Slovenia.  It  was 
acknowledged that an increase in extreme events was identified due to climate change in marine 
and coastal ecosystems, which have a negative impact on the already spatially limited coastal 
habitats and the species living in these habitats. Within the framework of reporting as per the 
Habitats Directive and the Birds Directive (Directive 2009/147/EC of the European Parliament and 
of the Council of 30 November 2009 on the conservation of wild birds; OJ L 20, 26.1.2010, p. 7), 
climate change was recognised as a threat, particularly for the species that depend on inland 
water ecosystems, such as crustaceans, fish, shellfish and amphibians. It is evident from the 
current research on wild pollinators that, in addition to intensive agriculture, climate change is 
considered one of the main reasons for their rapid decline. For example, climate change will be 
unfavourable for the majority of bumblebee species in Europe; on the basis of models, it is 
expected that almost one half of all bumblebee species could lose 50 to 80 per cent of the current 
areas of distribution by 2100. By means of the target research programme, the Design of the 
Methodology  for  the  Monitoring  of Wild  Pollinators  in  Slovenia,  which  is  underway,  Slovenia 
establishes the monitoring of their condition, determines reasons for its deterioration, and suggests 
proposals  for  improvement.  Biodiversity  will  be  more  resilient  against  climate  change  if  it  is 
preserved and will thus ensure healthy ecosystems. This will also be one of the key adjustments of 
humankind to climate change because we all depend on ecosystem services (The Natura 2000 
Newsletter, 2007). 
 
Healthy ecosystems will be preserved, or damaged ones improved, in such a way that the use of 
the existence of populations of key species and their habitats will be abandoned or reduced and 
renaturation measures will be implemented. 
 
The significance of the Natura 2000 areas as a mechanism for conserving biodiversity while 
adapting to climate change is defined in the EU Guidelines on climate change and Natura 2000 
(2013). The guidelines emphasise that the Natura 2000 areas play a crucial role as natural carbon 
storage  sites  (provision  of  natural  capacities  for  storing  carbon),  a  user  of  carbon  dioxide 
(increasing the capture of carbon dioxide in natural ecosystems), a risk reducer regarding the 
effect of extreme events and a reducer of impact caused by the sea level rising. Forests and 
wetlands (marshes) are particularly important for carbon storage in the Natura 2000 areas. The 
existing Natura 2000 network covers almost 30 per cent of European forest areas and a great 
proportion of European marshland. The assessments reveal that some 9.6 billion tonnes of carbon 
is stored in the Natura 2000 areas, which equals 35 billion tonnes of CO  (Guidelines on climate 
2
change and Natura 2000, 2013). 
 
2 2
Total Natura 2000 areas in Slovenia amount to 7,681 km , of which 7.675,5 km  is inland and 5.5 
2
km  by the sea, and cover 37.46 per cent of Slovenian territory. Forests cover 71 per cent of 
Natura 2000 areas. Some 5 per cent of agricultural land is above the tree line and 23 per cent of 
land is being overgrown. There is 1 per cent of water and 2 per cent of built-up area. In protected 
areas  (in  Triglav  National  Park,  regional  and  landscape  parks,  and  reserves  and  natural 
monuments), 29 per cent of the areas are Natura 2000 areas. 
 
Slovenia is striving to conserve biodiversity by maintaining habitats and species in a favourable 
condition to mitigate and adapt to climate change. Several activities, which are part of systemic 
measures and many target projects (Convention on Biological Diversity – Sixth National Report of 
the Republic of Slovenia, 2019), have been implemented in this field or are still underway. For 
  12 example, measures for the renovation of degraded habitats and improvement of the status of 
specific species in Natura 2000 priority areas are being carried out in accordance with the Natura 
2000 Management Programme (2015-2020), which includes projects within Natura 2000 financed 
with funds from the European Cohesion Policy (e.g. PoLJUBA: Rehabilitation and Conservation of 
Wetland Habitats in the area of Ljubljana Marsh Nature Park), and within the framework of the 
LIFE integrated project for enhanced management of Natura 2000 in Slovenia. 
 
Activities are also taking place with regard to the provision of connectivity between individual areas 
of nature through green infrastructure. Their purpose is to establish and ensure the favourable 
condition of the Natura 2000 areas and protected areas. Measures to prevent the introduction and 
spread of invasive alien species and their removal and management are also being implemented. 
Detailed objectives and measures to obtain a favourable condition of species and habitat types of 
European interest are determined in the Natura 2000 Management Programme. Responsible 
holders of measures and the anticipated financing (e.g. within the framework of implementing 
public services in various sectors or projects) were also determined. 
 
The  ReNPVO20-30  highlights  the  importance  of  nature  and  biodiversity  conservation  and 
recognises  thus  related  risks:  mitigation  and  adaptation  to  climate  change,  use  of  degraded 
surfaces and maintenance of ecosystem services, approaching net zero building, etc. Relating to 
international environmental commitments at the global level, implementation of the ReNPVO20-30 
will particularly support the commitments related to the conservation of biodiversity and mitigation 
of climate change. The guidelines of the National Nature Protection Programme (hereinafter: 
NNPP), which is an integral part of the ReNPVO20-30, also include informing the broader public 
about connections between climate changes and their impact on ecosystems and biodiversity. In 
connection with the measures of the Programme for conservation of wild fauna and flora, their 
habitats  and  ecosystems,  the  appertaining  Strategic  Plan  for  Biodiversity  until  2030  defines 
specific measures for attaining these guidelines and subordinate objectives, including research on 
the connection between biodiversity and climate change or ecosystem services. 
 
Since 2019, Slovenia has been implementing measures for the adaptation to climate change in the 
field of conserving biodiversity which are financed from the Climate Change Funding Programme 
(Ordinance on the Climate Change Funding Programme for the period 2020–2023; Official Gazette 
of  the  Republic  of  Slovenia  [Uradni  list  RS],  No.  14/20),  i.e.  measures  for  prevention  and 
management  of  the  introduction  and  spread  of  invasive  alien  species  and  measures  for 
management of climate change impact on saline ecosystems of the Sečovlje and Strunjan salt-
pans and other wetlands in protected and Natura 2000 areas. In particular, the measures are 
intended for the implementation of specific activities in the field for improving the status of species 
and habitat types, adaptation of habitats to climate changes and the implementation of other action 
to prevent and manage invasive alien species. The measures are incorporated in management 
plans  and  work  plans  of  protected  areas,  annual  work  programmes  of  public  institutions, 
concessionaires, public utility units and providers of contractual and custodial care. 
 
As per the data on the decline in biodiversity and related negative consequences for people at the 
national, EU and global levels, Slovenia will enhance its efforts to preserve biodiversity in the 
period after 2020. National objectives of the biodiversity protection for the 2020–2030 period are 
defined in the NNPP within the framework of the ReNPVO20-30. The set objectives, which also 
contribute to the adaptation to, and mitigation of, climate change, include the preservation of a 
favourable status of native wildlife species, preservation of a favourable status of the scope and 
quality of habitat types, especially those located in ecologically important and Natura 2000 areas, 
prevention  of  the  introduction  and  spread  of  invasive  alien  species  or  management  of  their 
introduction  and  spread,  establishment  and  maintenance  of  key  green  infrastructure, 
establishment of new protected areas, primarily in the most sensitive areas regarding nature 
conservation, and the enhancement of knowledge about biodiversity and its significance at all 
levels of society. With the largest proportion of Natura 2000 areas in the EU (almost 38 per cent of 
its total territory), Slovenia has great potential for sustainable climate solutions contributing to the 
adaptation to, and mitigation of, climate change. In September 2019, Slovenia became a member 
  13 of the Nature-Based Solutions Coalition at the UN Climate Action Summit in New York and it 
committed itself to implement four manifesto priorities. Active care for green infrastructure is 
particularly important for Slovenia, whose key framework in the EU is the Natura 2000 network, 
which was also highlighted upon the accession to the NBS coalition. Slovenia will ensure the 
attainment of objectives for a favourable status of species and habitat types in the Natura 2000 
areas  and  will  also  improve  the  ecological  connectivity  of  these  areas  (e.g.  by  means  of 
underpasses  for  amphibians  at  the  most  critical  crossing  points,  the  arrangement  of  green 
overpasses on older sections of the motorway network and at important road crossing points of 
large carnivores and other mammals). 
 
The most important challenge of preserving biodiversity will be the incorporation of biodiversity 
conservation objectives in the policies of key sectors. Care for biodiversity conservation when 
tackling climate change within various sectors, such as agriculture and fisheries, is also highlighted 
in the European Green Deal. The EGD stresses the urgency of restoration of ecosystems which 
are not in good condition, especially those rich in carbon, and plans to contribute significantly 
through  nature  conservation,  sustainable  use and  restoration  of  biodiversity  to  the  economic 
benefits and generation of sustainable jobs, growth and development in the EU member states, 
including Slovenia. 
 
 
3.6.2.1 Guidelines and measures adopted until 2030 
 
By implementing the objectives and measures of the ReNPVO20-30 and the already existing 
measures (e.g. for improving the status of wetlands and reducing invasive alien species), Slovenia 
will also dedicate its attention to the broader implementation of measures in the field of biodiversity 
conservation with an emphasis on the improvement and restoration of ecosystems, primarily of 
those measures which are recognised by the experts as urgent and scheduled for the respective 
governmental  Natura  2000  Management  Programme.  To  improve  the  state  of  nature  and 
implement measures introducing natural climate solutions that will result in positive effects for 
biodiversity, Slovenia will primarily reinforce the public service of nature conservation and expert 
services of other sectors. Sufficient funds from various sources will be provided. Progress will be 
attained  on  agricultural,  forest  and  water  land  owned  by  the  state  and  privately.  With  the 
improvement and restoration of ecosystems, mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change will 
also improve. To evaluate the contribution to the mitigation of climate change in Slovenian territory 
with implemented biodiversity conservation measures, Slovenia  will ensure additional studies. 
Slovenia will also obtain knowledge on habitat contribution to GHG retention in connection with 
their conservation status, which will be beneficial in further decision-making when defining priority 
activities from the aspect of natural climate solutions on the priorities of nature conservation. 
Slovenia will direct its spatial development by harmonising economic, social and environmental 
aspects and ensure biodiversity conservation when planning the green system of urban areas and 
green infrastructure at municipal, regional and national levels. It will use instruments, such as the 
assessments  of  plans and  programmes for  implementing the  policies  of  other  sectors, more 
efficiently and it will ensure that measures for conserving biodiversity, which are defined in the 
plans and programmes, will also be carried out in practice. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  14  
 
4  OBJECTIVES 
 
4.1  Reduction of GHG emissions and enhancement of removals by sinks 
 
Slovenia’s objective, compliant with the Paris Agreement, is to attain net zero emissions by 
2050 (removals equalling the remaining anthropogenic GHG emissions) or the attainment of 
climate neutrality. By 2050, Slovenia will reduce GHG emissions and improve sinks. It will 
reduce GHG emissions by 80 to 90 per cent in comparison to 2005 and simultaneously 
accelerate the implementation of climate change adaptation policies and the provision of 
climate safety for the public. 
 
The year 2005 was selected as the base year as emissions in 2005 were higher in that year 
only by 0.44 per cent than in 1986. The data for 2005 also enables division into emissions in 
the sectors included in the emissions trading system and those not included in this system. 
 
 
Table 1: Strategic sectoral objectives of reducing GHG until 2050 (source: Energy Efficiency Centre 
of Jožef Stefan Institute) 
 
  Annual GHG  Strategic sectoral 
emissions [kt  objectives of reducing 
of CO   GHG as per 2005 
2
  equiva lent] 
2050 
2005  2018 
Climate Strategy 
Transport  4,416.5  5,824.0  90–99% 
Energy  6,974.5  5,189.6  90–99% 
Industry  3,912.5  3,014.4  80–87% 
Agriculture  1,732.8  1,721.7  5–22% 
Broad use  2,680.0  1,310.8  87–96% 
Waste     
75–83% 
management  740.5  441.7 
TOTAL  20,456.8  17,502.1  80–90% 
    Sink of at least –2,500 
LULUCF 
-7,120.8  243  kt of CO  
2
equivalent 
    Attaining net zero 
TOTAL 
13,336  17,745.1  GHG emissions 
  15  
 
Figure 7: Course of net zero emissions in Slovenia in accordance with projections. The graph 
displays net emissions, i.e., emissions and taking into account sinks/emissions from the 
LULUCF sector. By enabling sinks, Slovenia will attain net zero emissions by 2050 as per 
projections (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan Institute). 
 
Net emissions in the LULUCF sector amounted to 243 kt of CO  equivalent in 2018, which 
2
means that emissions were recorded in the sector and not sinks. The objective of the 
LULUCF sector in 2050 is a net sink of at least –2,500 kt of CO  equivalent. It must be 
2
ensured that sinks in the obtained timber products will increase by 100 per cent, while the 
emissions due to settlement growth or built-up and similar land will reduce by 100 per cent in 
2050 in comparison to the level recorded in 2005. (See chapter 6.6.) 
 
 
4.1.1 National objectives for 2030 and indicative milestone for 2040 
 
The Climate Strategy and the NECP were drafted in coordination, which means that the 
projections  used  for  GHG  emissions  were  identical  for  both  documents.  The  NECP 
objectives until 2030 are compliant with the Strategy’s long-term perspective. The Climate 
Strategy  summarises key  guidelines  and  measures  of the  NECP,  which  is  the  Climate 
Strategy’s  action  plan. The  NECP  was  adopted  by  the  Government of  the  Republic  of 
Slovenia on 27 February 2020 and a comprehensive environmental impact assessment was 
also carried out for it. 
 
For 2030, the NECP sets the national objective for non-ETS sectors and anticipates that 
GHG emissions will reduce by at least 20 per cent in comparison to 2005. The objective of 
reducing all GHG emissions by 36 per cent until 2030 is consistent with the NECP. The 
strategic  objective  or  the  state’s  indicative  milestone  for  2040  is  a  55-  to  66-per  cent 
reduction of total GHG emissions if compared to 2005. 
 
With regard to 2005, the NECP also sets sectoral objectives for 2030 when reducing GHG 
emissions, 
i.e.: 
-  transport: +12%, 
-  broad use (buildings): –76%, 
-  agriculture: –1%, 
-  waste management: –65%, 
-  industry*: –43%, 
  16 -  energy*: –34%. 
(*Only for the part of the sector which is not included in the ETS.) 
 
To prevent damage due to climate change and in accordance with the new EU objectives, 
Slovenia will further tighten the objectives until 2030. In the shortest time possible (possibly in 
2021), it will analyse additional potential by sectors and design suitable additional measures 
in order to reduce its total emissions by 2030 in comparison to 2005 in compliance with the 
joint EU target, i.e. –55 per cent. 
 
The upgrade is anticipated to primarily incorporate mostly measures from the transport field: 
the plan for reducing needs for motorised transport (including an analysis of work from home, 
the impact of a 4-day workweek on transport, Slovenia’s decentralisation and the impact of 
the latter to transport), measures and plans for sustainable consumption and production, 
decarbonisation and development of industry-intensive sectors, greening of public finances to 
support  climate  politics  and  preparation  of  the  funding  model  for  implementation, 
decarbonisation  of  the  energy  sector  and  measures  for  a  just  transition  for  the  most 
vulnerable groups and regions. 
 
Feasibility of the set objectives involving the reduction of GHG emissions, and the attainment 
of climate neutrality requires immediate implementation of policies and measures already 
adopted and the cessation of the implementation and adoption of measures that are contrary 
to the reduction of GHG emissions. 
 
 
4.2  Energy efficiency 
 
4.2.1 Situation 
 
In  the  field  of  energy  efficiency,  Slovenia  set  an  objective  that  the  primary  energy 
consumption would not exceed 7.125 Mtoe in 2020.In 2018 and 2019, it was still within the 
boundaries of the indicative annual objective. The fulfilment of the objective for 2020 is 
expected, which is partly the result of implementing measures and partly due to external 
factors. The fuel price ratio in Slovenia and neighbouring countries has a great impact on 
energy use. The shrinking of economic activities in 2020 due to the coronavirus epidemic had 
a severe effect, but it is estimated that the objective of efficient energy use (hereinafter: EEU) 
would have been attained in 2020 in similar circumstances to those of recent years. The EEU 
measures also planned due to other positive effects, such as reduced air pollution and 
energy  costs  and  the attainment  of the  mandatory  share  of  renewable  energy  sources 
(hereinafter: RES), were not fully implemented. (See also sectoral chapters 5.1 to 5.4.) 
 
 
4.2.1.1 Guidelines and measures adopted until 2030 
 
The SDS 2030 highlights that the efficient use of materials contributes to a reduction in 
energy consumption at least as much as energy efficiency measures. 
 
As a target, the NECP sets the systematic implementation of adopted policies and measures 
so that the use of final energy in 2030 does not exceed 54.9 TWh (4.717 ktoe), and that the 
calculated use of primary energy does not exceed 73.9 TWh (6.356 ktoe) (Figure 8). For 
measures of efficient use of energy as per the NECP, see chapters 6.1 to 6.4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  17 4.2.2 Vision 
 
Energy efficiency, the circular economy and other sustainable practices to reduce energy 
demand will be the priority action areas which will contribute significantly to emission 
reduction until 2050. 
 
Many  concurrent  positive  effects  will  thus  be  attained,  including  the  reduction  of 
environmental impact and energy import dependency, costs management and subsequent 
energy poverty and an increase in the competitiveness of enterprises. 
 
 
The vision in the field of energy efficiency is supplemented by the vision in the area of circular 
economy and waste management. 
 
 
4.2.3 Objective by 2050 
 
The objective is to ensure that final energy consumption does not exceed 40 TWh in 2050 
and 47 TWh in 2040. The aim is also to reduce primary energy consumption, so that it will 
not exceed 65 TWh in 2040 (Figure 8). 
 
 
Figure 8: Movement of final energy consumption and objectives: current movement in the 
2005–2018 period, objectives adopted for 2020 and 2030, anticipated course and long-term 
objectives for 2040 and 2050 (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan Institute) 
 
 
 
4.2.4 Main orientations by 2050 
 
Giving  priority  to  the  measures  that  reduce  energy  consumption  and  improve  energy 
efficiency before the construction of new facilities for energy supply is the fundamental 
orientation harmonised with the principles of Slovenian legislation and strategic guidelines in 
the EU. As a rule, these measures are the most cost-efficient. 
 
Slovenia will actively strive to improve energy efficiency and reduce primary and final energy 
consumption  by  means  of  a  broad  range  of  measures.  Sustainable  practices  (circular 
economy, digitalisation, sustainable consumption, planning, sustainable practices in the field 
of transport, etc.) will manage the needs for energy services: heating, cooling, transport or its 
accessibility,  functioning  of  information  and  communications  devices,  mechanical  parts, 
lighting, etc. Energy services  will be provided  with minimum energy consumption in an 
efficient and sustainable manner. Efficient use of energy and materials will be simultaneously 
  18 promoted because the strategies for increasing material efficiency contribute to a reduction in 
energy consumption at least to the same extent as the energy efficiency measures. (Also see 
chapter 7.1.) 
 
Slovenia will arrange a support environment for further development of the offer of EEU 
products  and  services  and  the  reduction  of  energy  demand.  It  will  build  upon  current 
successful practices, promote further development of high-quality services and products and 
related  jobs.  Based  on  comparable  investment,  green  jobs  have  better  effects  on 
employment, while educational structure and economic effects grow. 
 
Energy efficiency is also crucial due to strategic reliability of supply or reduced energy import 
dependency and lower costs for imported fuels. 
Slovenia will also promote the improvement of energy efficiency with the aim of increasing 
the competitiveness of enterprises and managing price risks when expecting higher and 
more variable prices of energy products in the European and global markets (see also 
chapter 6.2). The implementation of measures for households exposed to the risk of energy 
poverty will be particularly promoted. 
 
As a priority, Slovenia will promote measures of efficient energy use, which simultaneously 
contribute to the adaptation to climate change, e.g. energy efficient renovation of buildings, 
which is also a measure of adaptation to heat waves. 
 
For  the  transition  to  a  low-carbon  circular  economy  and  attainment  of  the  Strategy’s 
objectives, Slovenia will promote digitalisation, which will be the key element of efficient use 
of energy and other sources in logistics, construction, production, services, agriculture and 
other sectors. Digitalisation will also be crucial for decarbonisation of the energy supply when 
connecting the systems of supply and demand, provision of flexibility and reliability of energy 
supply,  development  of  active  consumers,  etc.  Digitalisation  will  be  the  key  element  in 
introducing a circular economy directed towards the improvement of material efficiency and 
longer product life cycles (connecting services and production, product design, etc.) and 
energy efficiency. The sector of information communication technologies (hereinafter: ICT) 
and users will be directed towards sustainable digitalisation. 
 
 
4.2.5 Key factors for attaining the objectives in 2050 
 
The key factors for attaining the objectives include: 
- an increase in energy efficiency in the sectors of final energy consumption and 
transformations, and integration between them (integration between sectors is also 
discussed in chapter 6.1); 
- a decrease in energy demand when providing energy services and 
- introduction of sustainable practices that contribute to a lesser demand for energy 
services and subsequently energy. 
(Other factors are defined in more detail in chapters 6.1, 6.4 and 7.1.) 
 
4.3  Energy from renewable energy sources 
 
Energy from renewable energy sources denotes energy from renewable non-fossil sources, 
i.e.  wind,  solar  (solar  thermal  and  solar  photovoltaic  sources)  and  geothermal  energy, 
ambient energy, tidal energy, wave energy and other ocean energy, water energy, energy 
from biomass, landfill gas, sewage treatment plant gas and biogas. 
 
 
 
 
 
  19 4.3.1 Situation 
 
With a 21.14-per cent share of RES in gross final energy consumption in 2018, Slovenia is 
below the annual target value and is 3.9 percentage points away from the 25-per cent target 
share in 2020. Since 2010 when the National Renewable Energy Action Plan for the 2010–
2020 Period was adopted, the RES share increased only by a 0.9 percentage point. 
 
According  to  the  National  Renewable  Energy  Action  Plan  for  the  2010–2020  Period, 
problems in the attainment of indicative sectoral RES objectives in 2020 lie in the sectors of 
transport (5.5 per cent attained; the objective for 2020 was 10 per cent) and electricity 
generation (32.2 per cent attained; the objective was 39.3 per cent), while the objective was 
exceeded in the field of heating and cooling (31.6 per cent attained; the objective was 30.8 
per cent). 
 
Financial incentives and regulations were crucial among the current measures, which include 
the  support  scheme  promoting  electricity  generation  from  RES,  the  act  governing  the 
conditions of a concession for harnessing the energy potential of the lower Sava River, 
investment incentives for measures of the use of RES as a source of heat in households and 
heat production in district heating systems using RES, regulations governing efficient use of 
energy  in  buildings  (PURES)  and  a  mandatory  minimum  share  of  the  use  of  RES, 
cogeneration and excess heat or their combinations in district heating systems. A minimum 
mandatory share of RES in motor fuels is also prescribed, but not met. In the recent period, 
the promotion of energy self-sufficiency from RES is also exhibiting positive effects. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9: Attainment of RES target shares in Slovenia in the 2005–2018 period (source: 
Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan Institute) 
 
 
RES is an important domestic energy source; Slovenia’s import dependency amounted to 48 
per cent in 2018 and domestic energy production was 52 per cent, to which RES contributed 
16 percentage points. Nuclear contributed 22 percentage points to domestic production and 
solid fuels 13 percentage points. RES is even more important in electricity generation as it 
covers 32 per cent of gross final energy consumption. 
 
 
4.3.1.1 Guidelines and measures adopted until 2030 
 
As a target value for 2030, the NECP determines at least a 27-per cent share of renewable 
  20 sources in gross final energy consumption and the following indicative sectoral objectives: a 
43-per cent share in the electricity sector, a 41-per cent share in the sector of heating and 
cooling, and a 21-per cent share in transport (the share of biofuels is 11 per cent). 
 
The key measures defined in the NECP for promoting RES are financial supports: investment 
supports for households and district heating systems, and the support scheme promoting 
decentralised electricity generation from RES. Other measures, which were already adopted 
in previous documents (AP RES), but have not yet been implemented, include the promotion 
of RES integration in networks and the state’s proactive role in siting facilities in space 
(spatial definition of areas for RES production facilities on the basis of studies, improvement 
of legislation, accelerated preparation and financing of spatial plans, supplementation of 
regulations for more effective and sustainable siting of facilities in space, etc.). The NECP 
also  plans  accelerated  drafting  of  spatial  plans  for  public  multi-purpose  strategic 
infrastructure and energy projects, harmonisation of regulations governing the prevalence of 
public benefit in protected areas in accordance with the EU legislation and practice, and the 
enhancement of capacities for project preparation and implementation. See also chapter 6.1 
Energy supply. 
Measures in the field of local energy communities and RES communities for the exploitation 
of  RES  in  the  field  of  heating  and  cooling  are  also  new.  Measures  for  multi-purpose 
geothermal energy exploitation are also planned. The NECP determines that the ban on the 
purchase of new oil boilers will enter into force in 2023. The implementation of the measure 
of  a  mandatory  RES  share  in  motor  transport  continues  and  will  be  directed  towards 
advanced sustainable biofuels in the future and the introduction of RES gases in filling 
stations  with  compressed  natural  gas  (hereinafter:  CNG)  and  liquefied  natural  gas 
(hereinafter: LNG). 
 
The SDS 2030 determines the same target share of RES by 2030 as the NECP. 
 
 
4.3.2 Vision 
 
By 2050, the use of energy will, for the most part, be based on the supply of energy from 
renewable energy sources in addition to other low-carbon sources. RES will be well-
integrated in the energy system by connecting all types of networks and energy systems, 
including energy conversion and storage. 
 
In addition to decarbonisation, the development of RES will also be directed towards the 
attainment of synergies, especially the improvement of energy security, provision of green 
jobs and coherent regional development. Multi-purpose use of facilities will be promoted. 
 
 
4.3.3 Objectives by 2050 
 
Slovenia will increase RES shares in final energy consumption in all sectors, i.e. transport, 
consumption of electricity, heating and cooling. The total share of RES will reach at least 60 
per cent by 2050. Indicative objectives in individual sectors comprise at least a 65-per cent 
share of RES in transport, at least a 50-per cent share of RES in heating and cooling and at 
least an 80-per cent share of RES in gross final electricity consumption. 
 
 
4.3.4 Main orientations by 2050 
 
To attain the objective of net zero emissions and systematic abandonment of fossil fuels, 
Slovenia will increasingly promote a broad selection of technologies and sources and the 
expansion of RES in compliance with the  principles and requirements of environmental 
legislation. 
  21  
Slovenia will focus on greater exploitation of RES, which present a domestic source of 
energy and have a positive effect on the reliability of supply because they reduce import 
dependency, contribute to the diversification of sources, etc. By abandoning the use of 
domestic coal, the strategic significance of RES will further increase. 
 
Slovenia  will  further  promote  sources  already  used  traditionally  and  will  also  provide 
conditions for the exploitation of a broad variety of RES (solar, water, geothermal, wind 
energy  and  energy  from  wood  biomass,  etc.)  in  accordance  with  the  principles  and 
requirements of environmental and safety legislation. It will promote knowledge development 
and production of technologies and services for the exploitation (conversion) of RES and it 
will  support  RES  development,  particularly  measures  for  mutual  integration  of  energy 
systems and better connectivity or integration of RES in the network and energy storage, and 
the expansion of solutions to export markets. 
 
Slovenia  will  promote  the  self-sufficiency  of  buildings,  neighbourhoods  and  broader 
communities  which  exploit  RES  in  connection  with  energy  storage  and  optimisation  of 
connected energy systems. A support environment for the implementation of measures will 
be  established,  particularly  at  the  local  level.  A  comprehensive  stimulating  support 
environment will be set up, including suitable regulations for the development of active 
consumers and self-consumers and the communities which rely on these players as they will 
be  of  key  importance  when  attaining  objectives  in  the  field  of  RES.  For  efficient 
implementation of the adopted measures and the attainment of consumer benefits, this field 
will be regulated. 
 
Financial incentives functioning as a support scheme for electricity generation from RES, 
investment incentives for all sectors and new potential incentives will be proportionate to the 
impact on the environment, the energy system, the environment and other public benefits of 
projects.  Major  incentives  will  be  earmarked  for  development  solutions  and  entry  into 
markets. Slovenia will also intensively promote pilot projects for RES exploitation. (Also see 
chapter 8.) 
 
Simultaneously with RES, the development of system flexibility will also be promoted, as this 
is necessary for the functioning of the electricity system with an increased RES share. 
Whereby special attention will be dedicated to the establishment of short-term and seasonal 
energy storage facilities. While supported by various storage technologies, advantage will be 
given to energy storage facilities based on RES. Energy networks will be developed which 
will be able to simultaneously support intensive RES growth and altered energy consumption 
patterns while also ensuring the reliability of supply to all consumers. Integration of all energy 
systems will be promoted, i.e. electricity and gas networks, district heating systems and 
others. The development of low-carbon system services will be promoted, too. Due to cost 
optimisation, an upgrade of planning and qualitative steering of the development in this field 
will be required, including sectoral integration. (See chapter 6.1.) 
 
For energy purposes, Slovenia will further exploit wood biomass where the economic aspect 
is also significant as the exploitation of low-quality wood for energy improves the economics 
of wood processing chains and energy systems. Smaller local systems with a completed 
wood biomass supply will be particularly promoted. When exploiting wood, the principles of 
circular bioeconomy, forest coverage conservation and sustainable forest development are 
observed, which will be adjusted to the consequences of climate change and the objectives 
of ensuring CO  sinks in forests (see chapter 6.6 LULUCF). As a priority, the use of wood as 
2
a raw material for products will be promoted, as the processing of wood, wood waste and 
other lignocellulosic sources takes precedence over energy exploitation. The enhancement 
of the sector of wood processing production will be of key importance as it is based on the 
sector’s strategic guidelines and incentives for the wood processing industry to increase 
added  value  by  integrating  value  chains,  introducing  premium  design,  marketing  and 
  22 enabling sector internationalisation. Within this framework, the development of collection 
centres will be imperative. Long-term policies and measures of the circular economy will be 
drafted to enable a cascading use of wood and energy exploitation of wood products at the 
end of their lifespan (at the actual end and by observing the cascading use of wood) with no 
significant environmental impact. With regard to the foregoing, the scope of biomass suitable 
for energy use will also increase. 
 
The exploitation of RES in district heating and cooling systems will be promoted as a priority 
in order to attain synergies between climate policy and air protection policy. When defining 
new locations, the main criteria include the demand density for heating and cooling and the 
accessibility of renewable sources, whereby such development will also be supported by 
spatial planning. The objectives of reducing the environmental burden, including the transport 
of wood biomass, will also be considered. The promotion of wood biomass use in individual 
heating systems will be further directed at the areas where the use of other RES is not 
practical. By educating consumers, chimney sweeps and installers and the replacement of 
combustion plants, a decrease in emissions of dust particles will be achieved, which will 
result in better air quality. As per the NECP, the Heating and Cooling Strategy will be drafted 
to promote and steer such systems, and legislative instruments will strive for a continued 
increase of the RES share in heat production, while financial supports will stimulate the 
preparation and realisation of projects, which will exceed the standards. 
By supporting pilot projects, Slovenia will also become actively involved in the development 
and use of sustainable technologies for the production of synthetic fuels from wood biomass 
and other lignocellulosic sources. Furthermore, it will actively support the development of 
policies at the EU level in this field as economies of scale will be required. (Also see chapter 
6.1.) 
Slovenia will continue to intensively increase the use of solar energy, especially for electricity 
generation, and also the passive use of solar energy. To this end, it will modify and adjust the 
planning  of  neighbourhoods,  buildings  and  infrastructure  to  solar  energy,  which  will  be 
primarily exploited in urban, infrastructural and degraded areas (e.g. quarries). For better 
efficiency of measures, the adaptation and mitigation measures will be integrated. 
 
Slovenia will also focus on the construction of large solar power plants in degraded, industrial 
and infrastructural areas for the optimisation of the costs of integrating RES into electricity 
networks. (See chapter 6.1.) 
 
Slovenia  recognises  the  importance  of  hydropower  for  decarbonisation  of the  electricity 
sector and the advantages of hydroelectric power plants in comparison with the electricity 
generation technologies from other low-carbon sources, which is especially evident in the 
provision of system services. Hydroelectric power plants thus enable greater inclusion of 
other power plants using RES and other low-carbon sources in the electricity system. The 
exploitation of hydropower will be integrated into a broader context of water management on 
watercourses, as defined in the Spatial Development Strategy of Slovenia 2050 which is 
being drafted, and it will realise the related objectives (flood safety, biodiversity conservation 
and ecosystem services of wetlands as water reservoirs, etc.). 
 
As  a  result,  all  hydroelectric  power  plant  construction  projects  will  be  multi-purposed. 
Slovenia will nurture and further develop knowledge for the planning and construction of 
hydropower facilities as part of the multi-purpose use of space. 
 
It will increase its ambition relating to wind power exploitation and develop programmes for 
incorporating local communities in this development. 
 
Use of renewable energy sources and siting of the necessary infrastructure for its exploitation 
will  observe  spatial  and  other  (conservation)  conditions.  Power  plants  using  renewable 
energy sources (solar, wind, hydro, etc.) will be constructed with minimum impact on the 
environment  and  in  accordance  with  the  principles  and  requirements  of  environmental, 
  23 conservation  and  spatial  legislation,  and  consistent  implementation  of  projects  with  all 
mitigation measures will be ensured. As planned in the NECP, mechanisms compliant with 
the European legal order for siting power stations in protected areas will be established. 
Slovenia has a large proportion of Natura 2000 areas (approx. 38 per cent) and it can be 
expected that the environmental impact of the planned RES facilities with above 10 MW of 
installed power (water, wind and others) on these protected areas will be assessed as 
significant within the procedures for drafting national spatial plans (NSP) or that the impact of 
hydroelectric power plants on watercourses will be assessed as significant. In such cases 
and at the complainant’s proposal within the procedures of outweighing public benefit over 
other public benefit or in the interests of conserving nature and good water status as per the 
Slovenian and European legislation, Slovenia will assess and decide which public benefit will 
prevail in the specific case. 
 
The construction of large hydroelectric power plants of above 10 MW is compliant with the 
objectives of this Strategy and is in the public interest or represents public benefit due to the 
simultaneous environmental benefits of reducing GHG emissions, reliability of energy supply 
by means of low-carbon system services, low-carbon electricity generation and attainment of 
economic benefits. These are also the key crucial reasons for implementing the procedure of 
public interest or benefit prevalence. 
 
Geothermal energy is classified as an RES potential not yet sufficiently exploited, which is 
why  Slovenia  will  accelerate  the  promotion  of  its  exploitation.  It  will  primarily  focus  on 
sustainable and efficient exploitation of geothermal heat from thermal water in geothermal 
aquifers and shallow geothermal energy. Priority fields and directions of geothermal energy 
use will be determined in the action plan of the Heating and Cooling Strategy, which is being 
drafted. Initially, analyses of cost efficiency of deep geothermal energy exploitation will also 
be made and 
specific objectives and measures for its exploitation will be adopted. 
 
The use of biofuels will concentrate on the development, production and application of 
advanced  sustainable  biofuels  while  observing  food  safety.  In  doing  so,  Slovenia  will 
consistently observe and simultaneously develop the most advanced principles for regulating 
material and energy flows in a circular bioeconomy. 
 
It will promote research and development of new RES sustainable technologies and business 
models,  including  the  quality  and  efficiency  of  siting  RES  in  space.  It  will  intensively 
encourage  the  development  and  operations  of  local  energy  communities.  It  will  also 
accelerate investment in promising, but not yet economically feasible, projects involving RES 
in  companies,  promote  necessary  research,  innovation  and  pilot  projects  and  raise 
awareness of the public about the importance of the transition to RES. Based on pilot project 
results, Slovenia will determine new priority guidelines for promoting RES, such as efficient 
cascaded use of deep geothermal energy, exploitation of solar energy, heat storage, etc. 
 
When adopting measures in the field of RES, Slovenia will dedicate suitable attention to 
debureaucratisation and integration of RES into buildings, space and the energy system. 
Among other things, it will change the procedure for the issue of all necessary permits in 
order to accelerate and facilitate administrative procedures for RES integration. 
 
 
4.3.5 Key factors for attaining the objectives in 2050 
 
-  Increase in electricity generation from RES, 
-  increase in heat and cold supply from RES in buildings and industry; 
-  large proportion of heat and cold supply from RES in district heating and/or cooling 
systems; 
-  increase in the proportion of RES in transport; 
  24 -  breakthrough  technologies  and  systems  to  support  RES  (energy  storage,  system 
integration,  system  flexibility,  increase  of  network  capacities  for  distribution  and 
electricity transmission, etc.). 
 
 
4.3.6 Human resources and planning 
 
Slovenia  will  establish  an  organisational  structure  for  efficient  management  of  measures 
promotion and implementation. 
 
The  promotion  of  RES  is  now  carried  out  by  more  than  four  institutions  (Ministry  of 
Infrastructure, the Eco Fund, Borzen, the Ministry of the Environment and Spatial Planning 
(hereinafter: MOP), etc.). The models for greater concentration of knowledge and more 
efficient  functioning  will  be  examined,  and  the  majority  of  tasks  related  to  investment 
financing will be transferred to one of the organisations (the Eco Fund). 
 
The  exploitation  of  RES  in  local  communities  and  enhancement  of  capacities  for  the 
preparation and implementation of projects at this level will be promoted systematically. 
Measures to enhance human resources at the local level and in their support institutions and 
to integrate local communities at all levels of preparation and implementation of projects will 
be implemented. 
 
Integration of various stakeholders who will promptly and effectively harmonise the best 
solutions and suitably supervise the course of these projects is crucial, resulting in the 
acceleration of all required administrative procedures (acquisition of environmental, building 
and other permits and consents). 
Slovenia  will  implement  training  at  all  levels  to  support  planning  and  implementation  of 
measures and further development of the field. 
 
For efficient and qualitative siting in space, human resources capacity will be ensured and 
mechanisms for resolving disagreements between spatial developers and holders of projects 
or plans will be established in addition to other measures. 
 
5  ADAPTATION POLICIES AND GUIDELINES 
 
5.1  Situation 
 
We are witnessing great climate changes and their variables in Slovenia. In the 1961–2011 
period, the average air temperature increased by 1.7°C and precipitation dropped by some 
15 per cent in the western half of the country and by 10 per cent in the eastern half at the 
annual level in the same time period. The assessment of climate change in Slovenia until the 
end of the 21st century drafted by the Slovenian Environment Agency (Ocena podnebnih 
sprememb v Sloveniji do konca 21. stoletja, Sintezno poročilo - prvi del. (Assessment of 
Climate Change in Slovenia Until the End of the 21st Century, Synthesis Report, Part 1), 
Ministry of the Environment and Spatial Planning, the Slovenian Environment Agency, 2018) 
reveals  that  the  climate  will  continue  to  change  in  Slovenia  and  adjustments  will  be 
necessary.  (See  chapter  3.4.)  Adaptation  to  climate  change  is  inextricably  linked  with 
success in the field of climate change mitigation; the more humankind is successful in 
reducing GHG emissions, the lesser will be the impact of climate change and less adaptation 
will  be  required.  The  effects  of  climate  change  are  no  longer  avoidable,  which  is  why 
adaptation is of key importance to manage the risks they entail and intensify the response to 
climate change. Extreme weather phenomena (drought, torrential rains, heat waves, etc.) are 
already  occurring  more  frequently  and  alien  species  are  also  present,  proving  that  our 
environment is changing. It is only by joint mitigation measures (reduction of GHG emissions 
and  climate  change)  and  adaptation  (measures  and  policies  for  systematic  vulnerability 
reduction and an increase in resilience against detected or expected climate change impacts) 
  25 that a society resilient to the impact of climate change can be created. 
 
As stated in the proposed European Climate Law (Proposal for a regulation of the European 
Parliament and of the Council establishing the framework for achieving climate neutrality and 
amending Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 (European Climate Law)), member states will have to 
adopt comprehensive national strategies and plans for adaptation, as the latter is the key 
component of the long-term global response to climate change. In 2016, Slovenia adopted 
the Strategic Framework for Climate Change Adaptation, which incorporates guidelines for 
better mainstreaming of adaptation in policies, measures and actions. The action plan has 
not yet been drafted, but the inter-ministerial working group was very active at the time the 
Strategic Framework was being adopted. The sectoral adaptation strategy was adopted in 
agriculture and forestry in 2008 and two action plans were prepared (2009–2011 and 2010–
2011), which were carried out. Due to the subsequent cessation of funds, the measures were 
no longer implemented. In the 2014–2020 period, the discussion of climate change was 
among the strategic objectives of the Common Agricultural Policy and the adaptation is 
highlighted  as  one  of  the  central  objectives  in  the  new  agricultural  policy  2021–
2027.Adaptation measures also include certain other sectoral policies, especially pertaining 
to water (e.g. Flood Risk Reduction Plan 2017–2021, water management plans). 
 
The draft report on the implementation of the Strategic Framework for Climate Change 
Adaptation in the 2016–2020 period (from its adoption in December 2016) shows different 
success levels when implementing individual steps. The incorporation of climate change 
adaptation in strategic planning, European and international activities, provision of climate 
services and steps made relating to the production of situation analyses in the field of 
education proved to be the most successful. Implementation of certain steps was assessed 
as only partly successful, e.g. enhanced application of EIA and CEIA instruments, inter-
ministerial  cooperation,  interconnection  of  databases  and  communication  activities. 
Integration between local and regional levels (national contact point was not established) and 
the private sector, and the activities of establishing regular cooperation between researchers 
and decision makers (climate portal was not established) was assessed as unsuccessful for 
the most part. The key achievement was a significant increase in funds earmarked for 
adaptation purposes and the greatest failure was the lack of progress in preparing the 
vulnerability  indicator  and  assessments. With the  adoption  of  the  ReNPVO20-30, these 
activities were postponed to later years, which is compliant with the expected obligations 
within the framework of the new EU legislation in the field of climate rules. 
 
 
5.2  Vision 
 
By 2050, Slovenia will become a resilient society adapted to the climate change impact 
and characterised by a high quality of life and a high degree of safety of life, while taking 
full advantage of the changed climate on the basis of sustainable development. 
 
(Vision from the Strategic Framework for Climate Change Adaptation, 2016.) 
 
 
5.3  Objective by 2050 
 
From the Strategic Framework for Climate Change Adaptation: "The objective in the field of 
climate change adaptation is to reduce Slovenia’s exposure, sensitivity and vulnerability to 
climate change impact and increase the climate resilience and adaptive capacity of society." 
 
Slovenia will accelerate and implement more comprehensively the adopted documents and 
measures related to the adaptation and simultaneously promote the acquisition of expert 
bases. It will monitor its exposure to climate change, enhance society’s adaptive capacities 
and thus improve the preparedness and responsiveness of Slovenian society to climate 
  26 change. Priority will be given to sustainable solutions and measures. Adaptation measures 
will be cost-efficient and the most vulnerable groups of citizens will also be able to access 
them. 
 
 
5.4  Main orientations by 2050 
 
Slovenia is already adapting to new climate changes that are unavoidable but is doing so too 
slowly. So, it will immediately accelerate the activities in the field of adaptation to climate 
change. Timely response is crucial for the efficient attainment of adaptation objectives, as 
timely adjustments are also more cost-efficient. 
 
Numerous activities must be enhanced in Slovenia when adapting to climate changes. In 
particular, Slovenia will continue and further upgrade the knowledge regarding the impacts of 
climate change on individual sectors (by preparing vulnerability assessments) and on this 
basis plan priority measures. It will draft an analysis and a plan for acquiring missing data 
and  expert  bases  and  thus  establish  a  systematic  method  for  obtaining  information 
(research). Slovenia also somewhat lags behind when implementing documents and plans 
adopted  in  the  field  of  adaptation  (also  relating  to  the  implementation  of  the  Strategic 
Framework  for  Climate  Change  Adaptation),  which  is  why  it  will  accelerate  the 
implementation of the adopted Strategic Framework. 
 
Online consultation for the preparation of this Strategy revealed that knowledge of adaptation 
(and  also  measures)  to  climate  change  is  poorer  among  the  broader  public  than  the 
knowledge of mitigation, which is why Slovenia will (as per the Strategic Framework for 
Climate Change Adaptation) enhance dissemination, education and training in this field. 
The field of adaptation is, in common with the field of mitigation of climate change, one in 
which horizontal and individual sectors intertwine and integrate with each other. As a result, 
strategic, integrated and inclusive cooperation in all fields is mandatory for the formation of 
efficient measures, including a well-organised structure and development of knowledge and 
competence in the field of adaptation. 
 
When planning adaptation measures, Slovenia will prioritise sustainable solutions, which will 
ensure  ecological  connectivity  and  conservation  or  revitalisation  of  ecosystems  and 
consequently  contribute  to  the  improvement  of  the  biodiversity  status.  With  the  largest 
proportion of Natura 2000 areas in the EU (almost 38 per cent of surface), Slovenia has great 
potential when it comes to sustainable solutions that contribute to the adaptation to, and 
mitigation of, climate change. Active care for the green infrastructure is particularly important 
for Slovenia because the Natura 2000 network represents its key framework in the EU. An 
important part of green infrastructure, especially in urban and densely populated areas, is 
also green spaces in urban environments, which Slovenia will further maintain and also 
increase in accordance with other sectoral objectives. Additional mechanisms for maintaining 
and  enhancing  green  spaces  in  public  and  private  areas  (provision  of  sufficient  green 
spaces, arrangement of a uniform management and maintenance) will be established. 
 
When adapting to climate change, Slovenia will prioritise water-friendly solutions, which will 
contribute  to  the  attainment  of  substantive  objectives  of  water  protection,  use  and 
management with suitable measures. More intensive incorporation of water protection and 
sustainable management in other policies, such as local and regional development, spatial 
planning,  energy,  transport,  agriculture,  fisheries  and  tourism,  is  vital  for  a  successful 
adaptation to climate change. The objective of sustainable water use, which enables various 
types of use while observing long-term protection of available water resources and their 
quality,  must  be  pursued  accordingly  when  adapting  to  climate  change.  Protection, 
enhancement  and  restoration  of  groundwater  bodies  must  be  ensured,  including 
maintenance of a balance between its abstraction and recharge. The attainment of the 
objectives of the Water Framework Directive in regard to other water bodies must also be 
  27 improved. 
 
Slovenia will systematically and also financially promote the preparation of necessary expert 
bases, while knowledge of adaptation will be incorporated in all sectoral policies, especially 
the  policies  of  sustainable  spatial  management  and  spatial  planning.  Long-term  spatial 
planning will be linked to environmental protection, changing of the climate and suitable 
adaptation to it, and will be set into a suitable strategic development situation. Slovenia will 
ensure  the  overcoming  of  sectoral,  disciplinary  and  organisational  boundaries,  while 
maintaining the harmonisation of sectoral strategies and plans as measures can otherwise 
be in contravention, whereby preserved nature, healthy environment and sustainable spatial 
development will be given priority. 
 
In the future, Slovenia will only promote and support investments which will be climate-
resilient or more resilient to climate change in view of infrastructure. It will also efficiently 
utilise new opportunities resulting from climate change (e.g. extension of the growing season 
of plants, possibility of growing new plant species, new opportunities in tourism). 
 
Whenever possible, measures of mitigation and adaptation will be implemented together 
because  most  measures  contribute  to  the  objectives  of  reducing  GHG  emissions  and 
increasing  resilience.  Such  fields  also  include  an  increase  in  the  energy  efficiency  of 
buildings,  food  self-sufficiency,  restoration  of  degraded  ecosystems  and  green  urban 
infrastructure, which contributes to lower temperatures and subsequent lesser energy need 
for cooling. Green urban infrastructure also has a positive effect on biodiversity and reduces 
the urban heat island effect. 
 
 
5.5  Main fields of action 
 
Since the adoption of the Strategic Framework for Climate Change Adaptation, numerous new 
research and expert bases in the field of adaptation to climate change have been established 
and new documents were issued at the EU level calling for more decisive action relating to 
climate change, which is why Slovenia will re-evaluate the Strategic Framework within one 
year and supplement it accordingly if necessary. 
 
It will immediately address the gaps and continue with the preparation of suitable expert 
bases for the adaptation to climate change. Insufficient expert bases will be supplemented 
and gaps relating to the lack of knowledge and organisation for implementation will be filled. 
(See chapter 9.) 
 
Slovenia will produce vulnerability assessments for the fields of water (or the field of water 
will be integrated into other sectors), agriculture, forestry, public health, tourism, biodiversity, 
buildings, energy, transport, spatial planning, industry, urban and rural areas, coastal areas, 
sea and fisheries, cultural heritage, etc. Vulnerability assessments for agriculture, forestry, 
public health, nature and tourism will be drawn up with priority. 
 
Water management plans will also incorporate vulnerability assessments regarding climate 
change  (surface  water,  groundwater  and  also  drinking  water).  To  draft  the  vulnerability 
assessment for water, Slovenia must first fill in the gaps with regard to expert bases and 
studies (e.g. prepare projections for rising sea levels, flood studies: identification of areas, 
monitoring, intensity of flooding) and also adjust land use in accordance with the results. 
 
The preparation of vulnerability assessments will be methodologically harmonised as much 
as possible, and the system of objectives and measures will be designed in a way that will 
enable synergies and exclusion of measures which worsen the situation or possibilities for 
attaining objectives in any of the sub-fields. 
 
  28 Short-term adaptation activities have already been planned in the ReNPVO20-30. 
 
 
Table 2: Planned activities relating to adaptation (source: ReNPVO20-30) 
 
Measure  Deadline 
Type of  Measure  Holder 
indicator   
measure 
Provision of  Provision of climate services by  Functioning  MOP –  Ongoi
data  ensuring and forwarding  information  ARSO  ng 
information on climate  point  task 
conditions and expected 
climate change adjusted to the 
needs of users (sectors, public, 
researchers) and in a user-
friendly form which enables 
simple further application 
Planning and  Vulnerability assessment by  Drafted  MOP –  2021 
guiding  municipalities  assessments,  ARSO 
activities  Municipal adaptation  strategies,  Municip 2022 
strategies  plans,  alities 
Vulnerability assessment by  guidelines  Sectors  2020 
sectors 
Action plans for adaptation  MOP  2022 
measures 
Guidelines for climate change  MOP  2020 
impact assessment in 
administrative procedures 
 
For  their  implementation,  Slovenia  will  enhance  capacities,  empower  stakeholders  and 
systemically arrange financing in the field of adaptation. (See chapter 8.) It will also enhance 
knowledge with regard to adaptation and regulate organisational structure. (See chapter 9.) 
Adaptation will be closely incorporated in the organisational structure of mitigation because 
synergies occur frequently between the measures of mitigation and adaptation. 
 
 
5.6  Key factors for attaining the objective by 2050 
 
Suitable expert bases, human resources (their number and competence) and organisational 
structure. 
 
 
5.7  Human resources 
 
Training and education about the adaptation to climate change at all levels is essential for the 
implementation  of  adaptation  measures.  Slovenia  will  accelerate  the  development  of 
knowledge and competence in the research, academic, expert and professional spheres with 
formal and informal education. Environmental studies of natural sciences, engineering, social 
sciences and humanities are also important, as interdisciplinarity will be promoted. Additional 
funds will be earmarked for research and at least five target research projects on the topic of 
climate change adaptation will be tendered by no later than 2023 (of which at least two will 
be interdisciplinary) or funds will be earmarked for (somewhat) longer projects relating to 
adaptation (e.g. LIFE). The pool of experts and people working in the field of climate change 
adaptation will thus be expanded, while simultaneously striving to limit the brain drain. The 
existing research and pedagogical programmes will be integrated, and the field of finance 
systemically arranged. 
  29  
Financial resources for immediate commencement of implementation of the already known 
eligible adaptation measures will also be necessary, which will allow the education of experts 
in the operational section. 
 
Slovenia will provide support and knowledge to local communities for the preparation or 
implementation  of  adaptation  measures.  The  establishment  of  a  contact  point  for 
coordination and promotion of measure implementation at regional and local levels is also 
planned. 
 
5.8  Proposed progress monitoring indicators 
 
Degree of Slovenia’s vulnerability at the national and municipal levels (selection of indicators 
for  degree  of  vulnerability)  (Indicator  showing  Slovenia’s  vulnerability  to  climate  change, 
2016). 
 
6  STRATEGY BY SECTORS 
 
6.1  Energy supply 
6.1.1 Description of emission status and key measures 
 
With 29.7 per cent, energy supply comes second in total GHG emissions among the sectors, 
whereby 87 per cent of emissions come from coal power plants or combined heat and power 
plants. 
 
The  decarbonisation  process  is  already  underway;  between  2005  and  2018,  emissions 
decreased by 25.6 per cent, to which the closure of Trbovlje thermal power plant and the 
reduced  use  of  coal  in  Šoštanj  thermal  power  plant  contributed  the  most.  With  the 
construction of hydro power plants on the lower Sava River, solar power plants and other 
dispersed units in this period, the electricity generation from RES increased by 0.8 TWh, 
which is five per cent with regard to gross final energy consumption. 
 
So far, the energy system has very successfully managed the risks and ensured a high level 
of  strategic  and  operational  reliability  due  to  a  balanced  energy  mix,  diversification  of 
production locations, reliability of units and provision of high-quality system services. Energy 
prices in Slovenia do not deviate significantly from the average level in the EU. 
 
 
6.1.1.1 Guidelines and measures adopted until 2030 
 
A decision was made in the NECP regarding the gradual phasing out of coal for energy 
purposes before 2050. A detailed timeline will be adopted in 2021 in accordance with the 
principles and within the framework of the fair transition programme. The use of coal will 
reduce by 30 per cent by 2030 in comparison to 2005. Coal will only be used at one location 
after 2030. In the field of nuclear energy, the NECP plans the continuation of exploitation in 
Slovenia and a comprehensive examination of options for the long-term use of nuclear 
energy and the adoption of a decision relating to the construction of a new nuclear power 
plant by 2027. An increase in electricity generation from RES is planned and the attainment 
of a 43-per cent share of RES by 2030 in gross final electricity consumption, to which solar 
power plants will contribute the most. 
 
An accelerated development of an electricity distribution network is anticipated with the 
objective  of  increasing  the  capacity,  resilience  to  disturbances  and  flexibility  to  support 
electrification, especially in transport, and to increase a dispersed electricity generation from 
RES by 2030. 
 
  30 The key instruments defined in the NECP for the attainment of set objectives include the 
European emissions trading scheme (ETS), financial and other incentives for a dispersed 
electricity generation from RES, the upgrade of planning and decision-making about large 
hydro power plants, the aforementioned plan for phasing out coal, the restructuring of regions 
and  a  set  of  incentives  for  network  development  of  electricity  distribution.  Successful 
development of district heating and cooling systems is planned, including a one-per cent 
annual increase in the share of RES and excess heat and cold in district heating and cooling 
systems, and a continuation of existing instruments for measure promotion. 
 
 
6.1.2 Vision 
 
The attainment of minimum GHG emissions in the energy supply sector by 2050 while 
maintaining a high level of reliability and safety and ensuring the competitiveness and 
accessibility of energy services. The sector’s objective by 2050 is to establish sufficient 
production capacities for Slovenia’s self-sufficiency in energy supply. To attain climate 
objectives, Slovenia will enhance the role of RES and other low-carbon energy sources 
and systematically abandon fossil energy sources. 
 
The development of Slovenia’s energy supply will be harmonised with environmental 
objectives,  whereby  the  objectives  involving  the  minimum  of  adverse  effects  on  the 
environment in the entire life cycle of energy services will be attained. 
 
 
6.1.3 Objectives by 2050 
 
The objective in the energy supply sector is to attain minimum emissions by 2050. Interim 
strategic objectives include a 32-per cent reduction by 2030. The emission reduction by 2040 
will depend on the decision regarding the closure of Šoštanj thermal power plant or its 
upgrade with devices for CO  capture and storage. 
2
 
Figure 10: Emission trends in the 2005−2018 period and the anticipated course as per 
projections until 2050 for two scenarios (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan 
Institute) 
 
 
The sector’s objectives by 2050 relating to energy supply reliability include a reduction in 
import dependency for all energy products and diversification of sources and locations to 
ensure  self-sufficiency  in  unforeseen  and  critical  conditions  with  simultaneous  risk 
  31 management in uncertain circumstances, and the attainment of positive benefits of new 
development opportunities on common energy markets. 
6.1.4 Main orientations by 2050 
 
Fundamental  orientation  for  energy  management  in  Slovenia  gives  preference  to  the 
measures  of  efficient  use  of  energy  rather  than  the  construction  of  new  energy  supply 
capacities. 
 
To ensure the strategic reliability of energy supply or supply of energy services, the process 
of decarbonisation will also take place after 2030 in a way that allows the electricity system to 
provide the utmost coverage of use or self-sufficiency in electricity by means of competitive 
electricity generation and system services in Slovenia to manage risks in unpredictable and 
critical circumstances. The majority of older larger power plants will be decommissioned, 
which  will  be  a  great  challenge  for  attaining  the  reliability  objectives  after  2030.  The 
objectives also include a minimum dependency on energy imports by energy products and 
energy use purposes and an enhancement of flexibility and adaptability (robustness) of the 
electricity system to expected, more dynamic operating conditions. 
 
Further  diversification  of  primary  sources,  supply  routes,  locations  and  technologies  for 
electricity  generation,  including  the  diversification  of  locations  for  systemic  electricity 
generation, will be ensured. Due to altered patterns in energy consumption in the future, 
efforts  will  be  invested  in  the  provision  of  operational  reliability:  available  quantities  of 
electricity,  power  (local  and  temporal)  and  other  system  services,  especially  in  critical 
conditions. 
 
In  addition  to  the  reliability  and  low-carbon  objectives,  the  sectoral  objectives  of 
competitiveness were also set. International developments in this sector will have a great 
impact on the development in Slovenia, particularly electricity prices in the European market. 
In the medium- and long-term, higher electricity prices are expected and significantly altered 
price ratios between seasons. To ensure the competitiveness of the energy supply, it will be 
crucial to manage risks, which is why a highly adaptable energy system must be ensured in 
the long term (also see chapter 6.2.6). Together with the exploitation of new development 
opportunities, risk management will serve as the basis for ensuring the competitiveness of 
society, the economy and the energy sector. 
 
The guideline for directing the sector’s development to attain competitiveness will be the 
optimisation of social costs (all costs, excluding external), which will give precedence to the 
competitiveness of society over the competitiveness of the sector, for which suitable steering 
mechanisms will be drafted, i.e. economic and fiscal instruments, which will supplement 
mechanisms at the level of the EU, EU ETS and others. It is also important to maintain the 
competitiveness of public service activities. Slovenia will also promote the development of 
new business opportunities, including advanced energy services. It will steer the construction 
of new units, particularly for those low-carbon sources which have a great impact on the 
Slovenian  economy,  are  economically  viable  and  have  a  minimum  impact  on  the 
environment. 
 
In addition to measures for the efficient use of energy, measures for a circular economy and 
other measures for the reduction of the need for energy presented in chapters 6.2 to 6.4 and 
7, the following fields of action will be relevant for Slovenia in order to attain the objective: 
-  decarbonisation of electricity generation by abandoning the use of fossil fuels no later 
than by 2050; 
-  phasing out the use of coal in compliance with the timeline adopted by Slovenia in the 
National strategy for phasing out coal and restructuring coal regions in line with the 
principles of a just transition by the end of 2021, in which the principle of a just transition 
will be observed when determining the timeline; 
-  priority implementation of all necessary steps in accordance with the regulations for 
  32 ensuring long-term operations of the existing nuclear power plant, which contributes 
significantly to low-carbon electricity generation; 
-  considerable increase in electricity generation from RES; 
-  utilisation of the energy potential of water, wind, geothermal and other RES as per the 
principles  and  requirements  of  the  environmental  and  conservation  legislation.  The 
application of procedures of public interest prevalence is also anticipated for siting RES 
facilities in space (see chapter 4.3.4); 
-  increase in flexibility of the electricity system to support electrification, particularly in 
transport,  and  an  increase  in  low-carbon  electricity  generation  with  an  accelerated 
development of networks for electricity distribution and transmission, energy storage 
facilities, low-carbon system services, and integration of energy systems and sectors; 
-  in the field of nuclear energy, Slovenia is planning a long-term use of nuclear energy. To 
this  end,  administrative  procedures  will  be  implemented  and  documentation  for 
investment decision-making drafted. 
 
To attain the policies and objectives set by the sector, a complementary spatial policy, which 
harmonises  all  components  of  spatial  development,  is  of  key  importance.  The  Spatial 
Development Strategy of Slovenia 2050 is being prepared. It is important to maintain existing 
energy locations and develop new environmentally and spatially acceptable locations. More 
systematic, timely and proactive siting of potential energy facilities in space is also relevant 
for further development of the energy sector, e.g. also by protecting transmission corridors, 
strategic  assessment  and  decision-making  regarding  possible  locations  for  energy 
exploitation, including a prompt preparation of national spatial plans. 
 
6.1.5 Main fields of action 
 
In the period up to 2050, it is expected that final energy consumption will drop by almost 30 
per cent, while electricity consumption will increase by almost 40 per cent in comparison to 
2017. The share of electricity in final electricity consumption is anticipated to increase by 50 
per cent until 2050 because electrification will be an important decarbonisation factor in the 
sectors of final energy consumption. 
 
In this period, Slovenia will tackle a number of uncertainties, which is why the selection of an 
energy  mix  in  2050  will  greatly  depend  on  further  development  of  technologies,  their 
competitiveness and new opportunities. All countries are faced with the same or similar 
issues. Irrespective of the detected uncertainties, which are always present when drafting 
long-term strategies, the objective of decarbonisation of the sector by 2050 can be set 
because the expert bases show that such transition is possible. The routes to attain the 
objectives set may differ. Due to the uncertain future situation, it is necessary to maintain a 
certain degree of flexibility today regarding new units and future energy resources. Along the 
way,  it  will  be  necessary  to  make  decisions  several  times  and  choose  between  the 
alternatives for low-carbon electricity generation, so that all system functions of electricity 
supply will be ensured. When making choices, the following guidelines and criteria will have 
to be observed: 
-  climate objectives; 
-  minimum environmental impact or environmental acceptability of projects; 
-  competitiveness and financial feasibility; 
-  strategic and operating aspects of reliability of energy supply. 
 
To manage the risks, Slovenia will have to maintain high adaptability to changing conditions 
and provide all necessary bases for strategic and investment decision-making. (Also see 
chapter 6.1.5.) 
 
To maintain a stable electricity system with all functions, Slovenia will have to build two or 
more system power plants. According to the current analyses, the choice will also involve 
one or a combination of several of the following options: construction of a new reactor in the 
  33 nuclear power plant, several smaller nuclear power plants, or power plants using carbon 
neutral synthetic gases. The possibilities for exploiting hydropower, wind energy, biomass 
and geothermal energy for electricity generation are limited in Slovenia, while the electricity 
generation in solar power plants must be combined with seasonal energy storage. Suitable 
reliability of the electricity supply must be ensured throughout the year; December and 
January  are  the  most critical  months  as  it  is then  that  energy  consumption  is  highest. 
Carbon-neutral synthetic gas is an option as this enables the storage of surplus electricity 
generated from RES and its exploitation when such generation is not available. Nuclear 
energy is an option that enables baseload generation throughout the entire year and must be 
supplemented with additional generation from other resources in winter. Part of the solution 
is also the cogeneration of heat and electricity by means of carbon-neutral resources in 
district heating systems and active consumers, which was already taken into account in the 
analysed scenarios. With further technological development, the options will be upgraded 
and developed. It can be expected that the actual course of attaining net zero emissions and 
other objectives will likely combine all the measures mentioned; for better cost-efficiency, the 
system  and  scenarios  of  its  development  will  have  to  be  adjusted  promptly  to  new 
circumstances as much as possible. Current analyses unequivocally show that an ambitious 
objective in the field of electricity supply may be set and that the latter will play a significant 
role in the decarbonisation of other sectors. 
 
To decarbonise personal transport and other consumers and increase dispersed production 
and thus a new structure of supply and demand in the electricity market, Slovenia will 
enhance  the  flexibility  of  its  electricity  system  and  ensure  a  coherent  development  of 
systems. The development of solutions for energy storage will be intensive, i.e. short-term 
and seasonal storage will be attained with solutions within the electricity system (on the 
consumer side), by integrating electricity systems with district heating systems and gas 
network,  and  the  enhancement  of  international  connections  and  the  introduction  of 
digitalisation. In these fields, intensive development efforts have been underway throughout 
the world with the objective to reduce the storage costs of various technological options, and 
Slovenian knowledge is an integral part of this. Great flexibility of the operating regimes of 
conventional power plants will be required as this will be important for price risk management 
and ensuring the operational reliability or all necessary system solutions. In addition to other 
options, it is important to exploit the existing infrastructure for short-term electricity storage, 
such as hydroelectric reservoirs (also see chapter 4.3). Slovenia will develop the electricity 
transmission and distribution systems in a way that will allow the concept of electric vehicle 
charging to be optimised and harmonised with local electricity generation, and so that the 
transmission and distribution network will enable the supply of greater power during demand 
peaks,  especially  locally.  Due  to  cost  optimisation,  good  harmonisation  between  the 
development of self-sufficiency, energy storage systems, charging infrastructure and network 
or  energy  system  development  will  be  necessary.  Sectoral  integration  of  the  electricity 
system and transport will lead to a rational concept of charging vehicles, which will require 
less investment and will ensure greater stability of the electricity supply. 
 
District heating and cooling systems already have a lesser share in GHG emissions when 
supplying electricity, but to further reduce GHG emissions in the future, they will primarily be 
based on the exploitation of excess heat and renewable and other climate-neutral energy 
sources (e.g. climate-neutral synthetic gas). The expansion of networks is anticipated for 
their sustainable development, particularly in areas with greater population density where 
great potential for the expansion of the existing, and new, systems was defined, which will 
enable further decarbonisation of final consumption for new consumers. The amount of 
energy in the existing areas will reduce due to better energy efficiency of final consumption in 
buildings.  As  a  result,  systems  must  adjust  their  business  models  and  upgrade 
technologically by implementing measures to reduce losses, switch to lower temperature 
regimes when distributing heat, increase capacities for heat storage, optimise heat (and cold) 
generation, automatise and digitalise operational management, incorporate small dispersed 
sources, connect with the electricity sector (heat generation from electricity when prices are 
  34 negative), upgrade business models and develop additional service for energy consumers. 
The share of RES in district heating and cooling systems (hereinafter: DHC) will increase 
intensively; in addition to wood biomass, especially through the installation of larger shallow 
geothermal heat pumps (also see chapter 4.3), solar energy (in new smaller DH systems or 
within pilot projects to a greater extent) and all other available renewable sources and waste 
heat sources (from industry, services, municipal infrastructure, etc.). Pilot projects will be 
carried out to support the introduction of these and other, not yet established, technologies. 
An  increase  in  co-generation  of  heat  and  electricity,  particularly  from RES,  remains  an 
important development direction for DHC systems, which will contribute additionally to the 
greater flexibility and reliability of the electricity system and lower prices in winter. It will thus 
be mandatory to coordinate the planning of both systems. The national heating and cooling 
strategy  and  its  action  plan  will  serve  as  the  key  basis  for  efficient  implementation  of 
measures at national and local levels. Although the amount of heat from district heating 
systems will be reduced, Slovenia will double the share of buildings using district heating and 
cooling systems by 2050. The DHC systems will be important for decarbonisation of heating 
and cooling and for the synergies between climate policy and air protection policy. 
 
Slovenia will become actively involved in the current development of the generation and 
supply of synthetic, carbon-neutral, gaseous and liquid fuels (also known as "e-fuels": H , 
2
CH , NH , methanol, motor fuels, etc.). By producing these fuels, particularly from surplus 
4 3
electricity generated from RES, Slovenia will contribute significantly to the stable functioning 
of the electricity system and the storage of surplus electricity. It will thus ensure the upgrade 
of gas and other infrastructure, implementation of pilot projects and reliable and competitive 
supply of these energy products in the future. 
 
The preparations to introduce new technologies have commenced in Slovenia, but activities 
will have to be intensified. In the short-term, it will be necessary to accelerate the promotion 
of  pilot  projects,  key  analyses  of  options  for  the  introduction  of  new  technologies,  the 
analyses of options for seasonal and other energy storage, etc. The development in Slovenia 
is also important for business opportunities in the broader region. 
When adapting to climate change, Slovenia will ensure the resilience of the energy system, 
especially  of  electricity  transmission  and  distribution  networks,  to  the  consequences  of 
climate change, i.e. natural disasters and floods. Resilience to climate change will be the 
primary consideration when planning district heating and cooling systems (reduced need for 
heating, increased need for cooling). Connections in the energy exploitation of water are 
particularly complex and all potential synergies (flood safety, water retention) and risks (water 
heating, reducing biodiversity, attaining objectives for water, etc.) will have to be observed 
accordingly. Climate change will also affect the availability of biomass. 
 
 
6.1.6 Key factors for attaining target emissions by 2050 
 
To decarbonise the sector and support decarbonisation in other sectors, the following factors 
will be crucial: 
-  higher energy efficiency of all systems; 
-  gradual phasing out of coal and other fossil fuels; 
-  significant increase in electricity generation from low-carbon energy sources; 
-  significant increase in electricity generation from carbon-neutral gaseous fuels; 
-  establishment of a supply system with alternative fuels to allow the phasing out of fossil 
fuels in freight transport; 
-  decarbonisation and expansion of district heating systems; 
-  development of systems, especially networks, towards greater flexibility and integration of 
systems or sectors; 
-  construction of systems for storage of electricity and other energies; 
-  new technologies. 
 
  35 6.1.7 Human resources 
 
Key decisions on future options in the electricity sector require the observance of the need 
for human resources to implement individual solutions and their long-term perspective in 
order to contribute to the generation of added value in Slovenia. Within this framework, 
Slovenia will systematically promote the acquisition of: 
-  development knowledge which will be strengthened by promoting the implementation of 
pilot projects; 
-  knowledge regarding project implementation, including knowledge of project 
management, financing, technical aspects of implementation, conduct of administrative 
procedures, etc.; 
-  knowledge about project planning; 
-  knowledge of efficient management and maintenance of energy facilities; 
-  knowledge of qualitative and efficient siting of energy facilities in space, also with the 
objective of exporting such knowledge; 
-  knowledge relating to adaptation or resilience to climate change (e.g. in the field of 
water management). 
 
 
6.1.8 Proposed progress monitoring indicators 
 
-  GHG emissions in the energy supply sector; 
-  RES shares in gross final energy consumption, electricity, energy in transport and 
energy for heating and cooling; 
-  shares of carbon-neutral sources in the supply of liquid fuels, gaseous fuels and in 
electricity generation; 
-  specific emissions per unit of generated electricity in the supply of liquid fuels and 
gaseous fuels; 
-  share of buildings being heated from district heating systems; 
-  share of RES and excess heat in district heating and cooling systems; 
-  average specific emissions per unit of generated district heating in all systems in 
Slovenia. 
 
 
6.2 Industry 
 
6.2.1 Description of emission status and key measures 
 
Total GHG emissions from fuel combustion in manufacturing, construction and industrial 
processes amounted to 3,014 kt CO  equivalent in 2018. In the 2005–2018 period, emissions 
2
dropped by 23 per cent, whereby the emissions from fuel combustion decreased by 26 per 
cent  and  process  emissions  by  17  per  cent  (Figure  12).  In  2018,  process  emissions 
amounted to 39 per cent of total emissions in the industry sector. 
 
The largest share of CO  emissions in manufacturing and construction – when excluding 
2
direct emissions from electricity consumption – is ascribed to the manufacture of non-metallic 
mineral products (38 per cent share of process emissions), followed by manufacture of basic 
metals  (20  per  cent),  manufacture  of  paper  and  paper  products  (12  per  cent)  and 
manufacture of chemicals and chemical products (5 per cent). Other industries together 
account  for  approximately  a  25-per  cent  share  of  emissions  in  manufacturing  and 
construction. In comparison to the EU, the Slovenian business sector has a large proportion 
of  energy-intensive  value-added  activities  and  a  relatively  low  number  of  companies 
accounting for the majority of energy consumed and emissions generated in manufacturing. 
 
 
 
  36  
 
Figure 11: Analysis of GHG emission trends in the industry sector in the 2005–2018 period 
(source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan Institute) 
 
 
Emissions from the industry sector represent 17 per cent of total GHG emissions; as per the 
amount of emissions, this sector comes third. 
 
The  process  of  reducing  emissions  in  the  industry  sector  is  already  underway,  but  its 
intensity must be enhanced. The reduction of GHG emissions is the result of various factors, 
particularly  environmental  commitments,  enforcement  of  charges  on  carbon  dioxide 
emissions, emissions trading and implementation of measures for efficient use of energy, 
exploitation  of  renewable  sources,  improvement  of  industry  productions  processes  and 
restructuring within individual industries. 
 
6.2.1.1 Guidelines and measures adopted until 2030 
 
The NECP plans a gradual reduction of GHG emissions by 2030 to an extent greater than 
that determined by Regulation (EU) 2018/842 of the European Parliament and of the Council 
of 30 May 2018 on binding annual greenhouse gas emission reductions by Member States 
from 2021 to 2030 contributing to climate action to meet commitments under the Paris 
Agreement  and  amending  Regulation  (EU)  No  525/2013  (OJ  L  156,  19.6.2018,  p.  26; 
hereinafter: Effort Sharing Regulation), i.e. by at least 20 per cent as per 2005 by attaining 
indicative sectoral objectives. For industry (only for the part of the sector not included in the 
emissions trading system), the NECP anticipates a 43-per cent reduction in GHG emissions 
by  2030  (as  per  the  base  year  of  2005).  By  2017,  the  industry  sector  reduced  GHG 
emissions by 26 per cent. 
 
The NECP plans an increase to at least a 30-per cent share of RES in the industry sector 
while observing the exploitation of excess heat, whereby it also anticipates a 1.3-per cent 
annual increase of RES share in heating and cooling in industry, including waste heat and 
cold,  which  is  compliant  with  the  requirements  of  Article  23  of  recast  Directive  (EU) 
2018/2001 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the 
promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources (OJ L 328, 21.12.2018, p. 82; 
hereinafter: Directive (EU) 2018/2001). 
 
As per the NECP, it will be necessary to reduce the use of fossil energy sources and 
dependency on the import of fossil energy sources by supporting the implementation of pilot 
  37 projects for the production of synthetic methane and hydrogen (indicative objective is a 10-
per cent share of methane or hydrogen from a renewable source in the transmission and 
distribution network by 2030). 
 
Electricity is becoming an ever more important energy source for the business sector. The 
energy competitiveness and low carbon footprint of the business sector will be largely based 
on domestic low-carbon sources in the period until 2030, including water and nuclear energy. 
In accordance with the NECP guidelines, diversification of primary sources for electricity 
generation will improve, the use of RES will increase and so will, in part, the use of natural 
gas in high-efficiency co-generation of heat and electricity, which will reach at least 5 per cent 
of electricity generation in Slovenia by 2030. 
 
An increased use of biomass in collective and industrial heating devices is also anticipated, 
as is integration with district heating. Electricity and heat generation is important for Slovenia 
because it improves the reliability and competitiveness of energy provision, the reduction of 
GHG emissions and environment protection. 
 
Key NECP instruments in this field include the European emissions trading scheme, financial 
and  other  incentives  for  measures  for  the  efficient  use  of  energy,  dispersed  electricity 
generation  from  RES  and  high-efficiency  combined  heat  and  power  (hereinafter:  CHP), 
support for the implementation of pilot projects for the production of synthetic methane and 
hydrogen and the technologies CCS (carbon capture and storage) and CCU (carbon capture 
and utilisation). The plan for restructuring of regions, a new Slovenian industrial policy and 
the use of resources from the Just Transition Fund will also play an important role. The 
NECP also plans non-reimbursable financial incentives for measures for reducing process 
emissions in industry. 
 
The NECP anticipates the reduction of the quantity of generated waste, the promotion of re-
use and recycling and the utmost observance of circular economy objectives, especially with 
regard to construction and industrial waste. Support is also anticipated for the construction of 
missing  infrastructure for  the  treatment  of  municipal,  industrial  and  hazardous  waste  to 
promote the use of recycled materials as raw materials. 
The establishment of suitable incentives or economic signals is crucial for network integration 
of  RES,  local  adaptation  of  generation  and  demand,  and  the  cooperation  of  industrial 
companies in system services. The NECP measures also anticipate incentives (technical and 
personnel support) for promoting local energy communities and RES communities in which 
industry can also be incorporated. 
 
 
6.2.2 Vision 
 
To attain minimum emissions in the industry sector by 2050 while maintaining a high level 
of competitiveness and the transition to a low-carbon circular economy. By observing the 
Energy  Union  dimensions,  Slovenia  will  actively  strive  to  gradually  decarbonise  the 
industry and ensure financial incentives to restructure production processes by introducing 
green technologies and business models. 
 
 
6.2.3 Objective by 2050 
 
The goal is to reduce GHG emissions to between 80 to 87 per cent in comparison to 2005 or 
attain minimum emissions by 2050. Slovenia’s strategic objective by 2030 is to reduce GHG 
emissions in industry by 41 per cent if compared to 2005 and to between 60 and 70 per cent 
by 2040. 
 
 
 
  38  
Figure 12: Indicative trajectory of reducing GHG emissions in the industry sector and the 
emission trends in the 2005–2018 period relating to emissions in 2005 and guidelines until 
2050 (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan Institute) 
 
 
 
6.2.4 Main orientations by 2050 
 
The objective of attaining minimum emissions in industry requires extensive and long-term 
changes  which  will  be  structural  (transition  to  lower  energy  intensity  in  industry), 
technological  (technological  renewal)  and  taking  into  account  the  circular  economy 
throughout the value chain and between them, from production to use. The activities for 
reducing emissions in the sector will be intensified and special attention in the forthcoming 
years will be dedicated to the preparation of a suitable framework designed to capture all the 
elements  necessary  for  a  transition  to  climate  neutrality.  Despite  great  and  extensive 
changes, the transition to a low carbon economy must not decrease the competitiveness of 
the  economy,  which  is  why  various  measures  will  specifically  target  the  elimination  or 
mitigation  of  impacts  on  competitiveness.  The  characteristic  structure  of  the  Slovenian 
economy continues to be a large proportion of energy-intensive industry, which represents 
more than 50 per cent of energy use in the sector, while this proportion is much smaller in 
regard to the share of gross domestic product (hereinafter: GDP) and the share of persons 
employed. Energy-intensive industries will play a decisive role when realising the EGD as the 
transition  to  a  climate-neutral  society  will  not  be  attained  without  radical  change  and 
innovations in these industries, which is why Slovenia will deal with them accordingly within 
the new industrial strategy. 
 
Energy transition is a vital element in enhancing the competitiveness of the economy as it 
contributes greatly to the management of energy costs. In common with the rest of Europe, 
Slovenia  is  heavily  dependent  on  the  import  of  fossil  fuels.  Energy  costs  are  high  for 
companies and imported fuels have a large share in the EU balance of trade and directly 
impact the economic performance of nation states. In the long-term, the prices of imported 
fuels  are  expected  to  rise  and  fluctuate,  further  intensifying  the  pressure  on  costs. 
Furthermore, a growth in emission allowances is expected at the EU level. The third element 
of the price pressure on the economy is the further development of electricity prices. Current 
market prices do not reflect overall production costs, but usually only the operating costs of 
production. The electricity price from new units, which will define future prices, severely 
exceeds current market prices and consumer readiness to pay energy at these rates. Energy 
efficiency and other measures for reducing energy use are thus measures which will be very 
important for  Slovenian  companies  and the  state  as they  will  result  in  direct  economic 
benefits by means of energy cost management and contribute to the economic performance. 
It will also be very important that, simultaneously with the tightening of its climate policy, the 
  39 EU also enforces the carbon border adjustment mechanism for specific economic sectors, 
which will be efficient and compliant with the rules of the World Trade Organization, as 
anticipated in the EGD for countries with less strict objectives. In this way, the maximum 
economic  effects  of  energy  efficiency  measures,  the  circular  economy  and  other 
decarbonisation measures will be achieved. Slovenia will commence the transition on time 
and  will  prevent  all  stranded  investments  in  unsustainable  practices  and  subsequent 
unmanageable energy costs. 
 
Slovenia will prepare well for the transition and particularly support energy-intensive industry. 
The transition will be fair, i.e. linked to the programme for the safeguarding and development 
of new jobs in the most affected regions and areas. For the most part, the transition may take 
place within the existing companies with a gradual transition to energy or emission-less 
intensive products and the establishment of circular economy principles, but there are also 
other options. To this end, Slovenia will draft a clear incentive policy within the framework of 
the industrial policy currently being prepared. A fair transition in Slovenia will not only be 
limited to coal mining regions, but will also include energy-intensive industry, for which a 
support environment is yet to be prepared. The foregoing must also include the following 
elements: financial incentives from EU and domestic sources, tax policy measures (clear 
signals relating to the development of taxes that direct the transition) and other measures for 
active directing of investments (taxonomy, etc.). 
 
The fundamental principle of energy management in Slovenia is to prioritise the measures of 
efficient energy use with an emphasis on renewable sources, which also applies to industry. 
The  energy  efficiency  measures  enable  more  effective  energy  management,  and  they 
subsequently  reduce  final  energy  consumption  as  per  the  principles  of  the  low-carbon 
circular economy. It is necessary to highlight the use of excess heat generated in thermal 
processes, which may be captured and reused through various technologies. The use of 
excess heat is anticipated throughout industry and to a greater extent in energy-extensive 
industries, particularly in the manufacture of metals, paper, cement and chemicals. 
 
In  industry  and  in  certain  energy-intensive  branches  where  technologies  allow  this,  the 
replacement  of  gas  technologies  with  electric  ones  is  anticipated  in  heat  treatment 
processes. Possibilities for applying these types of technologies are found in the manufacture 
and  processing  of  glass,  steel  and  aluminium,  but  this  is  balanced  by  investments  in 
changing technologies. Slovenia will also support the integration of industrial companies with 
district heating systems, which could utilise excess heat from industry for the heating of other 
consumers (households, service and agricultural sectors). 
Branches with a marked need for heat (paper and chemical industries) or cold (food industry) 
may, in addition to heat generation with cogeneration technologies or tri-generation (cold 
generation), simultaneously generate electricity for their own needs or transmission to the 
network. With the use of biomass or biogas, GHG emissions will also decrease. 
 
To decarbonise the industry sector, it is critical to increase the use of RES in the field of 
electricity and heat generation. Within the framework of development priorities, Slovenia will 
examine the use of synthetic gas or hydrogen as a substitute energy product for natural gas 
in pilot projects by 2040 or sooner in order to reduce emissions in the industry sector. A 10-
per cent substitution of natural gas with synthetic gas is anticipated in 2030, a 25-per cent 
substitution is anticipated in 2040, and replacement of the entire quantity of natural gas with 
synthetic gas or hydrogen is anticipated by 2050. 
 
The RES share in the industry for heating purposes will be significantly increased, i.e. from 
11 per cent in 2017 to 26 per cent in 2050. Differences between individual branches of the 
processing industry will remain, whereby energy-intensive industries will have a key role in 
increasing the share of RES. In other industries, the wood processing industry will further 
maintain its leading position with regard to the scope and share of RES. An increase in direct 
RES use for heating purposes will be based until 2030 on the exploitation of wood biomass in 
  40 boilers and CHP systems, the use of low-temperature heat from geothermal energy and the 
use of RES from waste. A more extensive breakthrough in the industry after 2030 will be 
indirect and will particularly rely on synthetic gaseous biofuels and electricity acquired from 
RES, which is not included in the regular proportion. 
 
In  the  industries  emitting  process  emissions,  Slovenia  anticipates  the  application  of 
technologies for storage and reuse of carbon after 2040 as per the most optimistic scenarios 
of CCU development. As this is a new field, it is necessary to ensure a suitable support 
environment for pilot projects, appropriate infrastructure and a regulatory framework for the 
application  of  such  technologies.  Process  CO   emissions  could  be  captured  with  such 
2
technologies by means of electricity generated from RES and used for the generation of 
synthetic gas at suitable locations. The use of CCU technologies is especially anticipated in 
the cement industry and the manufacture of metals. 
 
In the next few years, the economy will focus on green, creative and smart development in 
accordance  with  the  Slovenian  Industrial  Policy  2021–2030.From  the  aspect  of  green, 
sustainable and circular development, it is vital to introduce measures of material efficiency, 
which are crucial for the transition to a circular economy. As per the EU plans (e.g. Circular 
Economy Action Plan), Slovenia will incorporate the principles of the circular economy in its 
regulations and procedures. Inclusion of the circular economy will be a decisive factor when 
contributing to the attainment of climate neutrality by 2050 and the disengagement between 
economic growth and the use of sources and energy, which will guarantee a positive impact 
on  the  long-term  competitiveness  of  a  sustainable  economy,  i.e.  with  support  for 
decarbonisation, transition to circular business models in all industries and specifically in key 
sectors: forestry/wood chain, manufacturing, mobility, food and the built environment. 
 
For correct evaluation of sustainability-oriented industrial production, Slovenia will support 
the introduction of evaluation of goods as per the life cycle cost analysis or a comparable 
indicator (carbon footprint), which will enable the recognition of more acceptable products in 
the market with regard to sustainability. 
 
Ensuring the competitiveness of industry and the economy will be one of the key tasks when 
drafting a business and financial framework for Slovenian economy. In the future, prices of 
energy  products  will  increase,  and  it  will  thus  be  necessary  to  request  and  harmonise 
European polices in the field of taxation of energy products, emissions trading, access to 
competitive energy products in the international European market and product environmental 
labelling. 
 
Due to the complexity of the transition to climate neutrality, the management of development 
activities of research organisations and industrial companies will present a great challenge, 
so Slovenia will provide appropriate guidance for development incentives with the objective 
of ensuring research and infrastructural support for the transition. 
 
Industry in the narrow sense encompasses only manufacturing, but industry in the broader 
sense is observed in the draft Slovenian Industrial Policy 2021–2030, i.e. also services 
related to industry, which are fewer than one fourth (logistics, trade, etc.). Furthermore, jobs 
in the manufacturing industry generate up to two jobs in other activities. While supported by 
digitalisation, the transition to a low-carbon circular economy will result in additional jobs in 
related services (the significance of repair, re-design, reuse, introduction of digital platforms, 
etc. is increasing). 
 
6.2.5 Main fields of action 
 
To attain the decarbonisation objective in the economy, the industry sector and particularly 
the energy-intensive industry branches will be further committed to reducing energy and 
emissions  intensity.  At  the  same  time,  a  comprehensive  support  environment  for 
  41 restructuring production processes to energy and emissions-less intensive processes will 
have  to  be  established  which  will  be  based  on  the  accelerated  introduction  of  green 
technologies. Within industrial, taxation and other economic policies, Slovenia will promote 
investment in efficient energy use, a low-carbon circular economy, self-sufficiency and RES 
supply. These industries are not only energy intensive, but also materially intensive and may 
contribute  crucially  to  the  transition  to  a  low-carbon  circular  economy.  They  are  also 
important from the viewpoint of value chains because they ensure raw materials for further 
industry, e.g. aluminium for major appliances, food and cosmetics industries, etc. Special 
discussion is required from this aspect, particularly to prevent industry movement to third 
countries ("carbon leakage") and a subsequent increase in emissions at the global level. 
 
Due to the increasing need for harmonisation of various policies, each future economic 
strategy will harmoniously and simultaneously address several fields such as innovations, 
competitiveness,  financing,  energy,  waste,  state  aids  and  other  aspects  linked  to  the 
transition to a low-carbon circular economy. We are also witnessing the beginning of a new 
industrial era, the so-called new industrial paradigm, Industry 4.0, the backbone of which is 
ICT and subsequent universal device connectivity (Internet of Things).These challenges will 
be discussed in the Slovenian Industrial Policy, which encompasses the years 2021 to 2030. 
Within  the  chapter  on  green  development,  the  Strategy  in  particular  highlights  energy-
intensive industry. 
 
Slovenia  will  promote  the  development  of  technologies,  which  include  the  upgrades  of 
gasification technologies, excess heat use technologies, waste recovery technologies for 
energy  purposes  (but  only  after  all  possibilities  of  material  use  have  been  exhausted), 
"Power-to-X"  technologies,  energy  digitalisation,  energy  storage,  emissions  capture  and 
reuse, synthetic gas generation, etc. The technologies proposed will serve as the basis for 
enhancing the competencies of industrial companies in the field of competitiveness and 
technological development. When transferring the development of new products, production 
processes, services and solutions in the economy, research in the field of EEU and RES and 
a climate-neutral and circular economy will play an important role. 
 
In the recent period, the industry received only limited financial incentives to increase energy 
efficiency and apply RES technologies, which is why most measures were implemented on a 
smaller scale than anticipated, which means that Slovenia will intensify the implementation 
until 2050. In addition to the foregoing measures, Slovenia will also support the measures 
which will contribute to the transition to a circular economy. As per the EGD, Slovenia will 
participate in the formation of a mechanism for carbon border adjustment to prevent the so-
called carbon leakage. 
 
The support scheme for electricity generated from RES and in CHP will play an important 
role  when  introducing  RES  technologies.  Stable  and  predictable  conditions  for  industry 
investors must be ensured. 
 
To  use  synthetic  gas  and  hydrogen  in  the  industry,  Slovenia  will  promote  technology 
development and provide suitable conditions for the establishment of infrastructure and an 
appropriate regulatory framework for the application of synthetic gas and hydrogen. It will 
draft guidelines for safe use, suitable fuel sources (RES), certification, inspections, etc. 
 
Slovenia will promote the necessary connectivity of industrial companies with district heating 
systems, which will be addressed in further detail in the District Heating Strategy, which is 
being drafted. This measure supports the reduction of heat consumption and enables greater 
exploitation of excess heat. 
 
To accelerate the development and generation of low-carbon or green technologies, the 
activities  will  further  intensify.  In  the  short-term,  Slovenia  will  enhance  pilot  projects, 
particularly  with  regard  to  excess  heat  use,  the  circular  economy  and  low-carbon 
  42 technologies. The development in Slovenia is also important for business opportunities in the 
wider region. This will take into account the broader legislative and administrative framework 
for the promotion of development, demonstration and marketing activities. 
 
Slovenia  will  dedicate  special  attention  to  the  promotion  of  small  and  medium-sized 
enterprises and the establishment of start-ups, which can be visible players in the green and 
digital  transformation  of  the  economy.  To  this  end,  Slovenia  will  also  focus  on  the 
development  of  suitable  knowledge  in  the  support  environment.  A group  of  experts for 
mentorship will be set up to support start-ups, including a system of financial and other 
supports for the realisation of low-carbon/circular ideas. A system for monitoring the effects 
on emissions and access to financing sources will also be established. Micro, small and 
medium-sized enterprises will obtain support through expert assistance and in the form of 
support for the implementation of circular business models. Slovenia will further strive to 
reduce administrative burdens and eliminate market access barriers, while improving access 
to various financing methods for the transition. 
 
 
6.2.6 Key factors for attaining target emissions by 2050 
 
To decarbonise the industry sector and support climate neutrality, the following factors will be 
crucial: 
-  enhancement of the transition to a low-carbon circular economy which, according to the 
assessments of the International Resource Panel, is supposed to contribute at least 60 
per cent to the reduction of GHG emissions in the global economy or to decarbonisation; 
-  establishment of incentives which will help companies to update production processes; 
-  establishment  of  an  efficient  support  environment  for  pilot  project  implementation, 
targeted incentives for small and medium-sized enterprises relating to the transition to a 
low-carbon  and  digitalised  economy  (by  eliminating  administrative  barriers), 
improvement of access to various financial sources; 
-  development, production and introduction of new sustainable products and services and 
business models (energy and material efficient technological solutions), establishment of 
a support environment for the development of an offer of comprehensive services for 
energy management; 
-  support for the development of a market for technologies with low emissions with the 
introduction of various mechanisms (e.g. a product’s lower carbon footprint as a criterion 
in the public procurement procedure); 
-  harmonisation between the implementation of a low-carbon transition in energy and 
industry, particularly from the aspect of ensuring a sufficient proportion of fuels from 
renewable sources for industry use, such as synthetic gas and hydrogen; 
-  increase  in  efficiency  of  energy  use,  use  of  effective  technologies  with  maximum 
efficiency (best available technologies – BAT), increase in the exploitation of RES and 
excess heat and integration with DH systems; 
-  competitiveness of low-carbon energy products; 
-  establishment of infrastructure and suitable legislative framework for the use of synthetic 
gas and hydrogen; 
-  promotion of digitalisation in companies and the introduction of Industry 4.0. which also 
enables the transition to a low-carbon circular economy. 
 
 
6.2.7 Human resources 
 
The industry sector is undoubtedly faced with a lack of suitable staff for energy and raw 
materials management. To increase competence and provide suitable staff in the industry 
sector, it is necessary to implement and monitor target-oriented training for preparation and 
implementation of projects relating to EEU, RES, material efficiency and the transition to a 
circular economy. The training of staff to manage energy and raw materials in industry will 
  43 also  play  an  important  role.  The  foregoing  activities  must  commence  immediately,  and 
training  must  be  carried  out  systematically,  including  the  promotion  of  pilot  project 
implementation in industry. 
 
The scope of anticipated activities addresses a broader selection of development policies 
related  to  research  and  innovation;  a  close  link  with  industrial,  entrepreneurial  and 
educational policies is particularly important. To transition to a climate-neutral society, fields 
promoting green and digital transition must become priority areas of research, development 
and innovation. Investments in research and innovation promotion in the field of low-carbon 
technologies and energy efficiency do not only contribute to sustainable development, but 
also  to  reliable  and  competitive  operations  of  the  energy  sector,  which  contributes 
significantly to the competitiveness of the entire economy. 
 
6.2.8 Proposed progress monitoring indicators 
 
-  GHG emissions in the industry sector, separate for ETS and non-ETS; 
-  separate monitoring of emissions in energy-intensive industries as per the adopted 
methodologies at the EU level; 
-  RES share in gross final energy consumption (Directive 2018/2001/EU); 
-  final energy consumption; 
-  emissions and material productivity. 
 
 
6.3 Transport and mobility 
 
6.3.1 Description of emission status and key measures 
 
GHG emissions from the transport sector amounted to 5,824 kt CO  equivalent in 2018, 
2
which is 32 per cent more than in 2005, whereby emissions in road transport presented 99.4 
per cent of all emissions in the transport sector and less than one per cent was attributed to 
remaining transport (railway, air, etc.). Transport is the sector with the largest share of GHG 
emissions in Slovenia. 
 
GHG emissions in the transport sector have been increasing in recent decades as a result of 
economic development, Slovenia’s geographical position as a transit country, settlement 
structure  and,  for  the  most  part,  neglect  in  the  development  of  alternative  methods  of 
passenger  and  goods  transport.  Personal  transport,  which  is  based  on  transport  using 
passenger cars and is the result of major investments in road infrastructure between 1991 
and  2010  and  partly  of  unsuitable  spatial  development,  which  failed  to  respond  to  the 
prevailing  dispersed  settlement  in  the  past,  causes  daily  congestion  at  peak  periods, 
especially around Ljubljana. Congestion is noticeably increasing and further contributes to 
growing emissions. The growing external costs incurred by Slovenia and its citizens due to 
transport also require action outside the framework of the fight against climate change. 
 
In the past, Slovenia had sectoral national programmes for various modes of transport (road, 
railway, aviation, maritime), which were not well coordinated with each other and of which the 
motorway programme was the most successful. Since 2015, we have a comprehensive 
Transport Development Strategy of the Republic of Slovenia Until 2030 (with incorporated 
sustainable  mobility),  but  the  implementation  of  the  measures  planned  is  too  slow 
(development of public passenger transport, introduction of a single ticket and harmonised 
timetables, time-consuming upgrade of the existing, or siting and construction of new, railway 
lines, etc.).Based on the foregoing, progress in the reduction of GHG emissions depends 
primarily  on  the  technological  progress  of  vehicles.  Slovenia  is  heavily  involved  in 
international transport corridors and the common EU market, which is why it has little impact 
on transit transport. As of 1995, priority has been given to the construction of a motorway 
network and thus the enhancement of European and interregional connectivity along the 
  44 Mediterranean and Baltic-Adriatic TEN-T corridor, while the remaining network of state roads 
was  only  maintained  and  preserved.  In  2008,  emissions  from  transport  exceeded  the 
emissions from 1986 by more than 200 per cent. They somewhat reduced at a later time, but 
transport nevertheless remains the only sector with such a large increase in emissions. 
 
6.3.1.1 Guidelines and measures adopted until 2030 
 
The NECP highlights that a correct and efficient approach to resolving the transport problem 
and its contribution to GHG emissions is of key importance. Rail transport and measures of 
sustainable mobility are put to the forefront, which will reduce GHG emissions in the transport 
sector and reduce traffic density. To implement this objective, Slovenia will: 
-  upgrade the railway infrastructure (preparation by 2025, implementation by 2030); 
-  upgrade  and  enhance  capacities  on  the  corridors  Kamnik–Ljubljana  (including 
electrification), Ljubljana–Kranj (double track), corridor south-east of Ljubljana, area of 
Ljubljana railway stations and stop facilities; 
-  upgrade tracks to attain TEN-T standards and increase the capacities on the lines 
Koper–Ljubljana  (new  Koper–Divača  line,  upgrade  of  the  Divača–Ljubljana  section), 
Maribor–Šentilj,  Pragersko–Maribor  (increase  in  permissible  loads),  Zidani  Most–
Pragersko, Ljubljana–Jesenice (the Karavanke Tunnel); 
-  further develop integrated public transport (harmonisation of timetables, integration of 
urban transport, establishment of a single/suitable public passenger transport operator, 
development of shared mobility, introduction of prioritisation of public transport vehicles, 
integration of cableway installations); 
-  promote sustainable modes of transport within the calculation of travel costs; 
-  reduce the needs for personal vehicle usage (work from home, change in parking policy, 
etc.):  this  will  improve  the  integration  of  spatial  and  transport  planning  (legal 
arrangements of comprehensive planning, reduce the suburbanisation trend, improve 
the management of daily migrations in broader urban areas and other functionally linked 
areas, enhance the compactness of towns, enhance the renovation and reactivation of 
poorly utilised or degraded areas in rural settlements for activities enabling an increase 
in  local  employment  and  a  reduction  in  daily  migrations  to  towns)  and  accordingly 
arrange micromobility hubs on city arterial roads and along motorways; 
-  actively promote the construction of an infrastructure for walking and cycling for daily 
users, including suitable infrastructure for charging stations and promotion of the use of 
electric bicycles; 
-  change the excise duty policy and adjust the toll policy in accordance with the guidelines 
of the EU legislation: 
-  ensure suitable support environment for a comprehensive electrification of the Port of 
Koper; 
-  provide suitable support environment for the use of alternative fuels such as electricity, 
liquefied and compressed natural gas, which will be gradually replaced by synthetic gas 
(syngas), hydrogen (H ) and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) which is of transitory nature, 
2
and biofuels, and 
-  simplify administrative procedures in transport electrification. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  45 6.3.2 Vision 
 
The attainment of minimum emissions in transport by 2050 will be adapted to society’s 
needs and have a minimum environmental impact. Efficient public passenger mobility will 
be  implemented  by  modern  means  of  transport.  A  modern  railway  network  will  be 
established  which  will  enable  regulated, frequent  and fast rail  transport  between  city 
centres. The prevailing modes of mobility in urban areas will be cycling and walking. 
Suitable  spatial  and  transport  planning,  application  of  modern  technologies  and  the 
transition to a low-carbon circular economy will reduce the need for mobility and the use of 
motor vehicles. For the most part, freight transport will be implemented by rail. Vehicles 
will be mostly powered by electricity, supplemented by renewable or synthetic gases 
which are low-carbon. 
 
 
6.3.3 Objective by 2050 
 
The target in the transport sector is to reduce emissions by 90 to 99 per cent by 2050 in 
comparison to 2005. The reduction by 2050 represents emissions lower than current ones by 
more than two magnitudes, which demands a thorough transformation of transport from how 
it is known today. This will not only pose a financial, but also a social challenge with a 
complex timeline. As per the NECP, transport emissions may only increase by 12 per cent by 
2030. The strategic objective by 2040 is to reduce emissions in the transport sector by 
between 55 and 65 per cent (in comparison to 2005). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13: Trend in reduction of GHG emissions as per the WAM scenario (with additional 
measures – ambitious) in the transport sector and the emission trends in the 2005–2018 
period as per the emissions in 2005 (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan 
Institute) 
 
 
 
6.3.4 Main orientations by 2050 
 
In addition to the main orientations of the sector to attain the objective of reduced GHG 
emissions  by  2050,  Slovenia  will  also  observe  other  development  objectives  (e.g.  rural 
development, traffic safety, adjustment to demographic changes with automation of vehicles, 
enabling access to functions (jobs and services)). It is thus practical to divide the sector into 
reduction  of  mobility  demand,  intensive  promotion  of  active  sustainable  mobility, 
improvement of public passenger transport and an increase in its use, increase of freight 
transport by rail, improvement of vehicle efficiency, technological improvement of vehicles, 
and promotion of the transition to alternative fuels. 
  46  
Until 2050, Slovenia will dedicate special attention to changes which will reduce the need for 
everyday  mobility  (e.g.  work  from  home,  reduced  number  of  working  days).  Both  are 
anticipated and enabled by technological progress. Certain practical social studies were also 
carried  out,  but  the  issue  of  social  acceptability  and  broader  consequences  remains. 
Furthermore, Slovenia will actively raise its citizens’ awareness that their everyday decisions 
affect significantly the scope of transport and thus the environment, e.g. choice of the place 
of residence, work, means of transport and purchase of new products. The transition to a 
low-carbon circular economy will have an important impact on the scope of freight flows, 
which will have a positive effect on the reduction of the need for freight transport. 
 
Within the scope of reducing mobility demand, Slovenia will improve the local attractiveness 
of cities and towns by providing basic (e.g. supply of food, health care, education) and 
advanced  (cultural  and  sports  activities,  localisation  of  jobs)  necessities  of  life.  With 
advancing  technologies  (mobility  as  a  service,  autonomous  vehicles,  digitalisation,  car 
sharing), the network’s burdens will be arranged more optimally. Technology advances must 
be further utilised in logistics to reduce transport needs. 
 
The future of efficient passenger transport requires the decisive modernisation of public 
passenger transport, especially rail transport, which has potential in the surrounding area of 
large towns (e.g. Ljubljana, Maribor). The railway network will be upgraded and expanded. 
Railway stations will be connected with suitable feeder bus lines or the infrastructure to 
enable transferring or transition between various passenger transport modes (e.g. park and 
ride, bike sheds). Passenger bus transport will be adjusted to the current and future needs of 
users. By 2050, the use of public passenger transport would have to more than double 
(increase by 120 per cent) in comparison to the current situation. The modernisation of the 
railway network, which must enable good connection with the EU network, is also crucial for 
efficient freight transport. 
 
For  the  most  part,  transport  prices  will  include  external  costs,  which  will  decrease  the 
attraction of motorised transport in the road network. The share of lorry transport, especially 
in transit transport, will decrease and so will the proportion of cars, whereby the priority will 
not be given to passenger cars, but the road will be shared more fairly by all transport users. 
This will stimulate the increase in walking and cycling, which will, in addition to mobility 
demand management, stop the growth in passenger car activity after 2030.Slovenia will also 
promote high occupancy of passenger cars (e.g. use of additional lanes for vehicles with 
several persons on motorways and expressways, change in the calculation of travel costs) 
and also freight vehicles. The occupancy of passenger cars must increase by at least 25 per 
cent. 
 
Access to restricted city centres will be limited to the most sustainable forms of transport. In 
broader urban and suburban areas, cycling will become an obvious form of mobility, while a 
combination of bus and rail transport will also be promoted. Sustainable mobility in the form 
of walking and cycling will also have health benefits in the form of necessary exercise. It will 
also contribute to lower noise emissions, less congestion and an increase in quality of the 
living environment. Cycling with e-bikes will also become an attractive mode of transport for 
long distances and for travelling between settlements. 
 
Slovenia will continue to implement alternative fuels in transport. Battery electric vehicles are 
becoming more popular, and the growing number of such vehicles must also be supported by 
an adequate charging infrastructure. By 2050, passenger transport will be electrified. A 
possible alternative to electrification, especially in freight transport, are bio- and synthetic 
fuels,  which  are  in  certain  aspects  of  their  production  CO   neutral,  and  also  hydrogen 
2
vehicles based on suitable technological development. By 2050, Slovenia will completely 
substitute  fossil  fuels  in  transport  with  low-carbon  alternatives.  All  technologies  for  the 
attainment of this objective, particularly in freight transport, have not yet been developed 
  47 technologically to the extent that they are competitive with regard to price, but the EU 
commitment to reduce GHG emissions in transport serves as a stable framework for further 
intensive development of these technologies. 
 
Slovenia  will promote research and development in the field of environmentally friendly 
transport. There are numerous companies and individuals who have actively contributed to 
the development of national and international mobility in the past and present, which is why 
Slovenia will further invest in research and development. 
 
In addition to the development of infrastructure and services in comprehensive transport 
planning, Slovenia will establish a support system of restrictions (travel costs, parking policy, 
etc.) and incentives (financial, etc.), which will also be supported by taxation policy. This will 
be the only way to change public habits. Slovenia will develop smart cities and communities. 
National transport systems and infrastructure will be adjusted to support new services of 
sustainable mobility by means of which it will be possible to reduce congestion and pollution, 
especially in the areas of cities and local communities. Users would thus be put first and 
enabled cost-efficient or affordable, healthier and cleaner alternatives. 
 
For efficient and qualitative siting in space, human resources capacity will be ensured and 
mechanisms for resolving disagreements between spatial developers and holders of projects 
or plans will be established. 
 
In the field of civil aviation, Slovenia cooperates in the formation and implementation of the 
resolution of the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) on the Carbon Offsetting 
and  Reduction  Scheme  for  International  Aviation  (CORSIA).  The  ICAO  commitment 
represents an establishment of the emission trading system in international aviation. Until the 
establishment  of  a  comprehensive  system  at  the  global  level,  Slovenia  is  harmonising 
legislative  frameworks  for  monitoring,  reporting  and  verifying  emissions  in  air  transport. 
Further  important  incentives  include  improvement  of  air  transport,  introduction  of  new 
technologies,  aircraft  operational  improvements  and  electrification  of  ground  support 
equipment, which will significantly enhance energy efficiency in aviation. To reduce GHG 
emissions in maritime transport, the International Maritime Organisation (IMO) adopted the 
Strategy on reduction of GHG emissions from ships. The Republic of Slovenia supports the 
adopted strategy and participates in the preparation of an action plan for its implementation. 
 
6.3.5 Main fields of action 
 
Slovenia  will  promote  changes  in  public  behaviour  by  providing  alternatives  to  motor 
transport and through active raising of awareness about the impact of our everyday decisions 
on the environment and society with the objective of reducing the demand for transport and 
motor transport. 
 
In personal transport, Slovenia will promote walking, cycling and the use of public passenger 
transport  for  short  distances  through  planning  and  the  construction  of  a  suitable 
infrastructure. For longer distances, the emphasis will be on the use of public passenger 
transport, for which a suitable infrastructure will be provided, including the use of alternative 
fuel vehicles. Railway hubs will be modernised, and high-capacity and regional lines will be 
constructed in accordance with Slovenia’s needs. Key measures in rail transport include: 
-  upgrade of railway corridors (main lines) for increasing capacity and 
attaining the TEN-T standards; 
-  upgrade of regional railway lines for shortening travel times and increasing the attraction 
of rail passenger transport (electrification and double-track lines in accordance with 
need); 
-  construction of a railway infrastructure to remove freight transit transport from city centres 
and urban settlements due to noise, social and economic reasons, spatial aspects, etc.; 
-  construction  of  a  railway  infrastructure  for  the  establishment  of  competitive  railway 
  48 connections on potential routes; 
-  construction  of  a  railway  infrastructure for  integrated  public  passenger  transport  and 
multimodal freight transport. 
 
Integrating  rail  and  road  transport  (bus  and  personal)  and  providing  the  assurance  of 
integration with the cycling culture (by establishing safe and covered bike sheds at railway 
and bus stations) within layovers or hubs are necessary components of transport in the 
future. Due to dispersed settlements, Slovenia will also introduce free-of-charge transport for 
older people in rural areas and seek synergies between various providers. With regard to 
passenger  cars,  Slovenia  will  promote  electrification  and  other  alternative  fuels,  higher 
vehicle occupancy, more efficient vehicles (improved engines, reduced size or weight of 
vehicles,  energy-efficient  driving).  Harmonised  operations  and  suitable,  as  well  as  soft, 
guidance  for  users  (information  dissemination,  tax  incentives,  etc.)  are  important  in 
connection with incentives. Road capacity intended for road transport will be expanded only 
when it is not possible to ensure a suitable level of public mobility or supply to the economy 
in another way (existing road infrastructure, rail transport, public passenger transport, etc.). 
Parking areas outside the park and ride system will be gradually reduced, particularly in town 
centres. Planning and construction of large parking areas will be limited in town centres (e.g. 
next to shopping centres). 
 
In addition to public passenger transport, cycling and walking will be at the forefront in towns 
and cities. Slovenia will ensure a suitable infrastructure for active sustainable mobility in 
towns and in the countryside. Safe, direct and comfortable cycling paths will be arranged in 
towns, between towns and between towns and rural areas. Bicycle rental schemes will be 
promoted at the national level, especially in combination with railway hubs, including the use 
of bikes in public sector institutions and the use of cargo bicycles. 
 
Slovenia will transfer freight transport to railway lines to the greatest extent possible, in 
readiness for which it will upgrade the existing railway network. Road freight transport will be 
decarbonised with the application of electric drives (battery vehicles, hydrogen) and bio- and 
synthetic fuels. Slovenia will stop subsidising the use of diesel fuel in freight transport and 
promote the transition to alternative fuels. The charging of tolls for freight transport will be 
adjusted accordingly by taking into account to a greater extent the various detrimental effects 
caused by GHG and other emissions. 
 
Biofuels are significant substitutes for liquid fossil fuels, which is why Slovenia will increase 
the proportion of biofuels in liquid fuels for road transport, while the proportion of biofuels 
produced from raw materials that are also used for food production will be gradually reduced. 
The biofuels used will meet sustainability criteria. 
 
 
6.3.6 Key factors for attaining target emissions by 2050 
 
To  attain  significant  emission  reduction  in  transport,  the  following  factors  are  of  key 
importance: 
-  incentives for changing behaviour from the aspect of selecting the mode of transport, 
purchasing decisions, selection of the place of residence, work, etc.; 
-  attractive public passenger transport system based on rail passenger transport with 
integrated public passenger transport points; 
-  modern railway infrastructure to ensure services for passenger and freight rail transport; 
-  safe and comfortable infrastructure for sustainable mobility (cycling infrastructure, 
layovers or hubs); 
-  integration of sustainable mobility into spatial, transport and building legislation; 
-  integrated spatial and transport planning which promotes concentration of settlements 
and mixed use of space, and ensures accessibility standards with sustainable mobility, 
etc.; 
  49 -  incentive measures for sustainable mobility (e.g. tax relief, soft measures, technological 
measures) and restrictive measures for reducing personal motor transport (e.g. parking 
policy, travel costs); 
-  substitution of technologies in passenger and freight transport with technologies that have 
no direct CO  emissions, and the introduction of renewable and low-carbon synthetic 
2
gases. 
 
 
6.3.7 Human resources 
 
For overall transport and spatial planning, Slovenia will establish an efficient decision-making 
culture based on expert bases while ensuring the provision of sufficient human resources. It 
will also draft expert bases within public administration and support the application of expert 
bases with external providers and organisational and other measures. 
 
A single integrated public passenger transport operator will be established to competently 
harmonise the interests of various stakeholders in this sector with the objective of providing 
high-quality services for all users. 
 
Slovenia  will  establish  planning  at  the  regional  level  as  current  practice  revealed  that 
Slovenian municipalities are frequently too small to efficiently implement the measures and 
the state is too rigid. 
 
Urban transport has a great impact on GHG emissions. Through comprehensive transport 
strategies, municipalities can greatly reduce air pollution in sensitive areas by using various 
traffic arrangements (traffic-calming zones, parking prohibition, traffic ban in certain urban 
areas, environmental zones) and the origin-destination transport prohibition regime. Due to 
the foregoing, Slovenia will ensure the suitable competence of stakeholders at the municipal 
and regional levels. The number of persons working in the field of comprehensive transport 
planning will be increased. 
 
 
6.3.8 Proposed progress monitoring indicators 
 
-  GHG emissions in transport; 
-  passenger transport structure; 
-  freight transport structure; 
-  proportion of RES in transport; 
-  electrification share in transport; 
-  time spent. 
 
 
6.4  Buildings – households and service activities 
 
6.4.1 Status of emissions and current measures 
 
Total GHG emissions from fuel combustion in the building sector amounted to 1,065 kt CO  
2
equivalent  in  2018,  which  is  6.1  per  cent  of  all  national  GHG  emissions.  The  energy 
consumption in the building sector, which is divided into households and service sector 
buildings, was 28.9 per cent of total energy consumption in 2018 and thus represented one 
of the main sources of CO  emissions. In the 2005–2018 period, emissions from the service 
2
sector buildings reduced by 57.5 per cent and 55 per cent from households. 
The reduction in GHG emissions is the result of various factors, especially environmental 
commitments,  implementation  of  measures  for  efficient  energy  use,  application  of 
technologies that exploit renewable sources, and an increase in centralised heating systems 
in  densely  populated  areas.  In  the  2005−2018  period,  emissions  in  buildings  dropped 
  50 particularly due to the investments in efficient energy use measures and switching to more 
efficient technologies and other energy sources (replacement of fuel oil contributed the most 
to this). When reducing GHG emissions in households, the financial instrument of grants was 
utilised, while public buildings underwent energy renovation exclusively based on cohesion 
funds, particularly the mechanism of energy performance contracting, in which municipalities 
were especially successful. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15: Analysis of GHG emission trends in the building sector in the 2005–2018 period 
(source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan Institute) 
 
 
 
6.4.1.1 Guidelines and measures to be adopted by 2030 
 
The NECP plans a higher rate of energy renovation, greater emphasis on RES technologies 
for heating and hot water supply, higher number of connections to district heating systems 
and considerable growth of their number in areas where this is economically justified. In 
2030, final energy consumption will drop by 21 per cent in comparison to 2017 and will 
amount to 1,339 ktoe, while it will decrease by 26 per cent in 2040 and amount to 1,249 ktoe. 
 
The NECP also plans a gradual prohibition of the purchase of new heating devices using 
fossil fuels as the ban on the purchase of new fossil fuel boilers will enter into force in 2023. 
In sparsely populated areas, the heating technologies are directed towards heat pumps and 
biomass-fired boilers, which remain an important low-carbon source in Slovenia. In towns 
where district systems are present, the NECP prioritises centralised systems. 
 
Key instruments of the NECP in the field of buildings include amendments to the regulations 
on energy efficiency of buildings, energy contracting, aid scheme for energy efficiency of low-
income households, financial incentives for energy efficiency and RES use in residential 
buildings, energy management in the public sector, non-repayable investment and financial 
incentives  for  energy  renovation  of  buildings  in  the  public  sector  (while  observing  the 
Guidelines for energy renovation of cultural heritage buildings) and the project office for 
energy renovation of public buildings. 
The Long-Term Strategy to Promote the Energy Renovation of National Building Stock and 
the Heating and Cooling Strategy, which follows the set vision of the NECP, will be 
exceptionally important for the building sector. 
 
 
  51 6.4.2 Vision 
 
To attain minimum emissions in the building sector before 2050 by maintaining a high 
level of energy renovation of buildings with low-carbon and renewable materials and 
directing  the  manner  of  heating  towards  centralised  heating  systems  and  RES 
technologies. 
To  direct  renovation  and  new  construction  towards  attaining  almost  zero  emissions 
throughout the entire life cycle. Promote broader building renovation to attain energy-
efficient, safe and healthy buildings. The field of building construction will be a priority field 
of the transition to a low-carbon circular economy. 
 
 
6.4.3 Objective by 2050 
 
The objective is to attain minimum GHG emissions by 2050. Interim strategic objectives are to 
reduce the emissions by 82 per cent in comparison to 2005 and to between 85 and 95 per 
cent by 2040. 
 
Figure  16:  Objective  of  reducing  GHG  emissions  in  the  building  sector,  current 
emissions/emission trend in the 2005−2018 period and anticipated course until 2050 (source: 
Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan Institute) 
 
 
6.4.4 Main orientations by 2050 
 
Orientations towards minimum emissions in buildings by 2050 lead to significant change in 
the structure of fuels. Fossil fuel technologies will be replaced by technologies using RES or 
combined heat and power stations and connections to district heating systems. 
 
The  efficiency  of  energy  use  in  buildings  does  not  depend  only  on  construction  and 
renovation, but also on the methods of application, management, raising of awareness and 
education of the users. 
 
Based on the act governing the efficient use of energy, Slovenia must annually renovate 
three per cent of total floor area in buildings owned and used by the government, which 
poses a challenge Slovenia cannot currently attain. For all public buildings, Slovenia will draft 
incentive instruments and financial incentives to (1) promote the so-called broader renovation 
of  public  buildings,  which  improves  safety  and  construction  and  technical  condition  of 
  52 buildings (incorporation of seismic, fire and other aspects of renovation) and observes the 
health and living comfort of building users (incorporation of air quality and other aspects), and 
(2) enable the suitable treatment of buildings with a special status (e.g. cultural heritage). 
 
The projections made take into account the growth in final energy consumption in buildings in 
regard  to  (1)  an  increased  share  of  heat  pumps  as  the  heating  technologies  in  newly 
constructed buildings and when replacing old inefficient systems; (2) an increased use of 
electricity by other technical systems in buildings (lighting, cooling), and (3) an increased use 
of electricity by interior fittings where the service sector is a large consumer. The NECP also 
plans a larger share of replacement and use of heat pumps, efficient lighting, rational use of 
interior fittings, suitable addressing of energy poverty and gives priority to comprehensive 
energy renovations before partial measures. 
 
6.4.5 Main fields of action 
 
By 2050 in the light of the objectives set in the field of GHG emissions in the general use 
sector  (households,  agriculture, forestry  and  other  use,  which  also  includes  the  service 
sector), Slovenia will attain minimum emissions. The objective is exceptionally challenging 
because Slovenia will continue with energy renovation of buildings for its attainment and 
promote technologies that use RES and centralised heating systems. The use of fossil fuels 
will decrease significantly in buildings and district systems will be utilised to the maximum as 
they enable greater flexibility and connectivity with other sectors, e.g. electricity generation 
through heat storage, while RES will be used elsewhere. 
 
Until 2030 and onwards, Slovenia will maintain the level of comprehensive energy renovation 
above two per cent annually. The foregoing will particularly be a great challenge for the 
public sector because more challenging renovations will be carried out due to economic, 
technical  and  other  reasons.  Slovenia  will  establish  a  comprehensive  approach  to  the 
renovation  of  buildings  in  which  other  renovation  aspects  will  also  be  included  (e.g. 
earthquake, fire and air quality). The process of construction and renovation design will be 
supported  by  mandatory  building  information  modelling,  which  will  increase  the  design 
efficiency, reduce the investment value and contribute to the optimisation of time needed for 
the implementation of works. Slovenia will train experts in sustainable construction, building 
and renovation and experts for cultural heritage renovation supported by building information 
modelling (BIM) to ensure the high-quality implementation of construction and renovation. 
 
Regulations  regarding  construction  and  renovation  of  buildings  will  further  tighten.  The 
regulations  regarding  efficient  use  of  energy  in  buildings  will  become  stricter  with  the 
introduction of a nearly zero-energy building (hereinafter: NZEB) and incorporation of a 
sustainable evaluation of buildings, which will impact the scope of renovations and energy 
efficiency of buildings. The introduction of sustainable construction criteria when building and 
renovating will focus on reduction of the carbon footprint of the materials used and a positive 
impact of the circular construction concept on the emissions. Construction and renovation of 
buildings as per the NZEB requirements began to be implemented at the end of 2020 and the 
requirements centre on highly energy efficient buildings which will meet their heating needs 
by means of the technologies exploiting RES. 
 
The  measures  aimed  at  decarbonisation  of  buildings  will  require  a  substantial  financial 
injection. Financial incentives for households will be further provided from the contribution for 
EEU and the Special Climate Change Fund, while grant resources for energy renovation of 
public buildings have not been provided. Furthermore, financial instruments will have to be 
developed to promote overall renovation of buildings, which will ensure greater efficiency of 
investments (e.g. provision of anti-seismic fortification before buildings’ energy renovation). 
The  measures  in  this  sector  have  significant  synergistic  and  multiplicative  effects  and 
enhance economic competitiveness and employment in the long term. The implementation or 
promotion of urgent, but not always economically viable, measures is involved in this case; 
  53 some of these measures are more challenging, having a relatively long period of return and a 
long lifespan. The measures also affect user health and wellbeing, which results in a broader 
social benefit due to lower health costs and improved labour productivity on the behalf of 
better working and living conditions. The measures relating to buildings are also important for 
fast growth of economic activity and recovery from the economic and financial crisis. Energy 
renovation of buildings also contributes to reduced emissions of other harmful substances 
into the air, which has an indirect positive impact on health. Implementation of the relevant 
measures is vital for the adaptation to climate change as well. 
 
 
6.4.6 Key factors for attaining target emissions by 2050 
 
To decarbonise the sector and support decarbonisation in other sectors, the following factors 
will be crucial: 
-  renovation of buildings from energy and other aspects; 
-  RES share in centralised and de-centralised heating systems; 
-  information-supported construction; 
-  sustainability assessment of buildings; 
-  sustainable construction and renovation and promotion of comprehensive renovation of 
buildings; 
-  recognising examples of good practice and their promotion, and 
-  raising awareness of users and their behaviour. 
 
 
6.4.7 Human resources 
 
For a successful implementation of measures in buildings, it is necessary to ensure the 
ongoing education of human resources for efficient construction and renovation of buildings 
and training in developing fields, e.g. sustainability assessment of buildings and construction 
planning  supported  by  BIM.  Systematic  training  and  the  promotion  of  pilot  project 
implementation must commence immediately. When renovating cultural heritage, experts in 
cultural heritage protection must be engaged. 
 
6.4.8 Proposed progress monitoring indicators 
 
-  Reduction in CO  emissions with measures in public buildings; 
2
-  area of energy-renovated public buildings; 
-  intensity of CO  in public buildings and buildings of private service sector; 
2
-  improvement of energy efficiency in the building sector; 
-  RES proportion in the use of fuels in general use; 
-  leverage and specific GHG emissions in the housing sector. 
 
6.5 Agriculture 
 
In the agricultural sector, the methane emissions produced by ruminants and released from 
manure are dealt with, including the emissions of nitrous oxide generated during the storage 
of livestock manure and due to fertilisation of agricultural plants with mineral fertilisers, 
livestock fertilisers and other organic fertilisers. The agricultural sector also deals with indirect 
nitrous  oxide  emissions,  which  are  the  result  of  leakage  of  nitrogen  compounds  from 
agriculture into air and water (particularly ammonia and nitrates). The majority of these 
emissions are generated in the natural environment and attributed to agriculture. Carbon 
dioxide released in agriculture due to the use of fossil fuels is discussed in chapter 6.7, while 
sinks or carbon dioxide emissions generated from the use and changed use of agricultural 
land are discussed in the chapter on LULUCF (see chapter 6.6). 
 
 
  54 6.5.1 Status of emissions and current measures 
 
In 2018, agriculture contributed 9.8 per cent of all GHG emissions. The contribution from 
agriculture was 15.6 per cent in accordance with the decision outside the EU ETS scheme 
(Decision 406/2009/EC). The largest share of GHG in agriculture is attributed to methane 
produced by ruminants (53.9 per cent) and storage of livestock fertilisers (14.7 per cent), 
followed by nitrous oxide released due to the fertilisation of agricultural plants with livestock 
fertilisers and grazing (9.1 per cent), and fertilisation with mineral fertilisers (7.4 per cent). 
Agriculture  pursues  the  objective  set  in  the  Operational  Programme  for  Reducing 
Greenhouse Gas Emissions by 2020 (hereinafter: OP GHG 2020), which determines that 
GHG emissions will remain at the level of no more than + 5 per cent in comparison to 2005 
with a simultaneous increase in self-sufficiency in food by 2020. In 2017, emissions were 0.6 
per cent lower than the baseline in 2005. 
 
In the past, in the area of GHG emissions in agriculture, Slovenia implemented measures to 
increase  efficiency  of  animal  husbandry,  increase  the  share  of  grazing,  and  to  more 
efficiently  circulate  nitrogen  in  agriculture.  The  greatest  effect  is  attributed  to  the 
implementation  of  breeding  programmes  for  cattle,  sheep  and  goats,  and  the  public 
agricultural advisory service and rural development programmes. Within the latter, incentives 
for investments which promote efficiency of agricultural holdings and incentives for above-
standard  farming  methods,  which  contribute  to  the  reduction  of  GHG  emissions,  are 
highlighted. 
 
6.5.1.1 Guidelines and measures to be adopted by 2030 
 
Slovenia improved the ambitiousness of the OP GHG 2020 (+ 5 per cent by 2020 as per 
2005) and determined the indicative sectoral objective to - 1 per cent by 2030 as per 2005 in 
the  NECP  while  observing  the  anticipated  improvement  of  food  safety.  To  attain  this 
objective, Slovenia will intensify the efforts in the field of efficient animal production. It will 
promote  the  construction  of  microbiogas  devices  for  biogas  production  from  livestock 
fertilisers and the grazing of cattle, sheep and goats, and improve nitrogen recovery from 
livestock and mineral fertilisers. Long-term guidelines of Slovenian agriculture are determined 
in the resolution, "Our food, rural areas and natural resources beyond 2021" (Resolution: Our 
food,  rural  areas  and  natural  resources  after  2021;  Official  Gazette  of  the  Republic  of 
Slovenia [Uradni list RS], No. 8/20), which was adopted by the National Assembly on 29 
January  2020.  Four  groups  of  objectives  in  the  resolution  also  include  "Sustainable 
management  of  natural  resources  and  provision  of  public  goods".  Within  this  group  of 
objectives, climate change is addressed as a specific objective, "Climate change mitigation 
and adaptation". The resolution determines that technological measures which reduce GHG 
emissions in crop and animal production and measures that increase carbon sinks will be 
supported in the environment and climate schemes from direct payments. The measures will 
be defined in more detail in the Strategic Plan of the Common Agricultural Policy 2021–2027 
(strategic plan CAP), which is being drafted. Measures to mitigate climate change will be 
programmed separately within the specific objective, "Contribute to climate change mitigation 
and adaptation, as well as sustainable energy". Based on the analysis of the situation and 
needs assessment, the strategic plan CAP will incorporate an intervention strategy to attain 
the relevant objective. The strategic plan CAP will be harmonised with all national documents 
and strategies in this field, including the NECP and this Strategy. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  55 6.5.2 Vision 
 
 
To reduce GHG emissions while observing natural conditions for agriculture, improvement of 
food safety and an increase in self-sufficiency in food and the pursuit of other objectives of 
multifunctional agriculture, such as the reduction of negative impact on water, soil and air, 
biodiversity  protection,  conservation  of  cultural  landscape,  ensuring  animal  welfare  and 
maintenance/increase of carbon stocks in agricultural soil. 
  
 
6.5.3 Objectives by 2050 
 
By 2050, agriculture will reduce GHG emissions by 22 per cent if compared to 2005. The 
interim objective by 2030 is a 1-per cent reduction in GHG emissions and the strategic 
objective by 2040 is an 8-per cent reduction. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17: Emission trends in the 2005−2018 period and the anticipated course until 2050 
(source: Agricultural Institute of Slovenia) 
 
 
 
6.5.4 Main orientations by 2050 
 
Main orientations in agriculture include: 
-  emissions reduction with simultaneous improvement of self-sufficiency in food, which 
means a reduction of emissions per unit of food produced; 
-  action in all areas with an emphasis on the most important emissions sources; 
-  introduction of solutions which also enable the attainment of other environmental, social 
and  economic  objectives  or  even  contribute  to  their  realisation  (competitiveness  of 
agriculture,  water,  air,  soil  and  biodiversity  protection,  conservation  of  agricultural 
landscape,  preservation  of  farming  in  hilly  and  mountainous  areas  and  other  less 
favoured areas, welfare of farm animals, etc.); 
-  avoidance of solutions which increase emissions in other sectors locally and globally 
(emissions related to energy use in agriculture, emissions related to land use and land 
use  change,  emissions  in  the  production  of  mineral  fertilisers  and  plant  protection 
products, emissions related to transport of food and feed, emissions related to the 
construction  of  agricultural  facilities  and  production  of  agricultural  machinery  and 
  56 equipment). 
 
The objectives will be attained with the reduction of methane emissions by approximately 33 
per cent and nitrous oxide by one per cent. Emissions from livestock will be reduced by 
approximately 31 per cent. Despite measures to improve nitrogen circulation, emissions in 
crop production will remain at the level of 2005 due to an increase in physical scope of 
production. 
 
6.5.5 Main fields of action 
 
Priority areas of action: 
-  methane emissions from the digestive system of farmed animals, especially in cattle 
farming; 
-  methane emissions from the storage of livestock fertilisers; 
-  efficient nitrogen circulation in agriculture, including organic farming and thus indirect 
reduction of direct nitrous oxide emissions from storages of livestock fertilisers and 
agricultural land, and indirect emissions due to the leakage of nitrogen compounds into 
the environment (especially of ammonia into the air and nitrates into water). 
 
Measures to reduce GHG emissions in agriculture: 
 
Measures from the agricultural policy: 
 
The  Rural  Development  Programme  of  the  Republic  of  Slovenia  2014–2020  is  a 
programming  document  which  represents  the  programme  basis  for  drawing  financial 
resources  from  the  European  Agricultural  Fund  for  Rural  Development  (EAFRD).  The 
programme reflects the national priorities defined by a member state based on an analysis of 
the situation in agriculture, food production and forestry. In the next programming period of 
2021–2027, the measures to mitigate climate change will be programmed within the strategic 
plan CAP with an emphasis on: 
-  investments  in  buildings  and  equipment  which  contribute  to  the  reduction  of  GHG 
emissions  and  the  quantity  of  food  waste  in  primary  production  (biogas  devices, 
equipment for precision fertilisation and fertilisation with low emissions, arrangement of 
pastures, stables and storage for livestock fertilisers, storage for agricultural products, 
etc.); 
-  the promotion of agricultural practices, which contribute to the reduction of methane and 
nitrous  oxide  emissions  while  observing  the  principles  of  a  circular  economy  and 
including the techniques of precision agriculture and digital technology (improvement of 
voluminous feed quality, planned feeding of farmed animals based on fodder analysis 
results and calculated feed rations, preventive measures for improving animal health and 
welfare, planned fertilisation of agricultural plants based on soil analysis results, efficient 
and environmentally friendly plant protection against diseases and pests, fertilisation with 
low emissions, acquisition of biogas from livestock manure, grazing of cattle, sheep and 
goats, greening of stubble, growing legume crops (grain legumes and clovers), practices 
to reduce quantities of waste food or fodder during its production and storage, etc.); 
-  enhancement of supply chains with local food of plant origin, which will enable a gradual 
transition from cattle farming to plant production with high added value in areas with 
favourable agricultural conditions. 
 
Agricultural policy will support implementation of the foregoing measures particularly through 
the measures of agri-environment-climate payments and organic farming. The criteria for 
selection of investments will include their contribution to the reduction of GHG emissions. 
Other measures from the strategic plan CAP 2021–2027, especially those for air and water 
protection, will also contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions. 
 
Starting  points  for  action  relating  to  the  mitigation  of  climate  change  and  agriculture 
  57 adaptation  will  be  determined  within  Specific  objective  4:  Contribute  to  climate  change 
mitigation and adaptation, as well as sustainable energy, while the starting points for action 
relating to water protection will be defined within Specific objective 5: Foster sustainable 
development and efficient management of natural resources such as water, soil and air. 
 
Breeding programmes 
 
Breeding programmes contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions through the selection of 
more efficient animals by passing traits on to succeeding generations and by means of 
semen donors to the herds not participating in the breeding programmes. Slovenia will 
ensure further implementation of breeding programmes. More attention will be dedicated to: 
-  secondary  traits  which,  in  addition  to  the  primary  ones,  impact  GHG  emissions 
(exploitation of feed ration energy, reproduction characteristics, longevity, accumulation 
of body reserves, etc.), 
-  introduction of direct and more reliable indirect methane emissions measurements at the 
level of an individual animal and the application of modern selection methods for low 
emissions (e.g. genomic selection). 
 
 Functioning and efficient AKIS system  
 
A functioning and efficient AKIS (Agricultural Knowledge and Innovation System) system is 
crucial for the reduction of GHG emissions in agriculture. In the field of AKIS functioning, 
Slovenia will: 
-  ensure the creation of new knowledge and innovations relating to emissions and 
emission-related fields; 
-  ensure maintenance, exchange and transfer of knowledge with regard to emissions, 
whereby it will observe particularities such as a large number of agricultural holdings, 
unfavourable age, size and education structure; 
-  intensify the integration of content related to emissions in the programmes of agricultural 
secondary schools and high education institutions; 
-  ensure operations of the public advisory service and increase the scope of its functioning 
relating to climate change mitigation. 
 
 
6.5.6 Key factors for attaining target emissions by 2050 
 
The volume of emissions is highly dependent on the behaviour of individuals, who need a 
considerable  amount  of  knowledge  to  reduce  them.  Efficient  knowledge  transfer  and 
exchange are critical for emissions reduction and are particularly challenging due to a large 
number  of  small  and  non-specialised  agricultural  holdings  in  Slovenia.  The  effect  of 
investments in low emissions technologies is smaller than on large agricultural holdings 
because of the fragmentation of agricultural land. Due to natural features and fragmentation, 
it is also more difficult to introduce grazing, which generally reduces emissions, but also 
results in risks linked to increased erosion of agricultural land and increased emissions in the 
event of lower breeding efficiency. Preservation and expansion of pasture grazing will also 
depend on the success of managing the issue of large carnivores. Faster progress relating to 
GHG emissions in the areas of important grassland habitats is limited with the requirements 
for preserving traditional methods of farming, such as late mowing. Certain methods of 
breeding, which are introduced to provide better animal welfare (e.g. free range cows and 
barn rearing of hens) are also unfavourable from the aspect of GHG emissions. Certain new 
solutions  for  reducing  emissions  are  questionable  from  the  viewpoint  of  their  social 
acceptability (e.g. inhibitors of rumen methanogenesis). 
 
The attainment of objectives with regard to reducing GHG emissions will also depend on the 
success of adjusting agriculture to climate change. Adjustment in the field of crop production 
and animal production is relevant. Disruptions in the growth of agricultural plants linked with 
  58 climate change affect the exploitation of nitrogen and subsequent emissions of nitrous oxide. 
To  this  end,  measures  that  prevent  the  consequences  of  drought  (irrigation,  sowing  of 
drought-tolerant plants, etc.), measures that prevent the consequences of frost and adverse 
weather events (sprinkler systems, hail protection, etc.) and measures that prevent plant 
diseases and pests linked to climate change are important. Climate change also affects farm 
animals and methane and nitrous oxide emissions through reduced breeding efficiency. 
Measures that ensure sufficient quantities of high-quality fodder and prevent heat stress and 
the spread of diseases in farm animals are crucial in this area. 
To attain the target emissions by 2050, Slovenia must specifically: 
-  enhance human resources in the field of GHG emissions in agriculture; 
-  intensify knowledge exchange and transfer in the public agricultural advisory service and 
in agricultural holdings; 
-  examine the positive and possible negative effects of new technologies for the reduction 
of GHG emissions in agriculture with regard to the attainment of other social, economic 
and environmental objectives and their timely communication to the public; 
-  collect  data  and  develop  methods  for  assessing  the  carbon  footprint  of  agricultural 
products and livestock products. 
 
6.5.7 Human resources 
 
The  availability  of  human  resources  is  among  the  important  aspects  of  the  successful 
implementation of the measures of the Climate Strategy. Planning of measures at the level of 
the state and individual agricultural holdings requires specific technological knowledge and a 
comprehensive approach. The lack of suitable human resources is evident at all levels, from 
the planning of measures to their introduction at agricultural holdings. To provide human 
resources, it is necessary to: 
-  motivate and educate young generations of farmers and provide lifelong learning for 
heads of agricultural holdings; 
-  systematically finance jobs in the field of GHG emissions in agricultural education, 
research organisations and public agricultural advisory service based on plans and 
targets; 
-  implement lifelong learning for heads of agricultural holdings. 
 
6.5.8 Proposed progress monitoring indicators 
 
-  Total  GHG  emissions  in  agriculture,  overall  and  individually  for  livestock  and  crop 
production; 
-  intensity  of  GHG  emissions  in  production  of  cow  milk  (emissions  per  unit  of  milk 
produced); 
-  intensity of GHG emissions in beef production (emissions per unit of beef finishing meat 
produced); 
-  gross nitrogen balance surplus in agriculture; 
-  area of agricultural land in organic farming, overall and fields individually; 
-  area of agricultural land in measures of the strategic plan CAP, which contribute to more 
efficient nitrogen circulation; 
-  number of farmed animals in measures of the strategic plan CAP, which contribute to a 
reduction in methane emissions. 
 
6.6 Land use, land use change and forestry 
 
6.6.1 Status of emissions and current measures 
 
The LULUCF sector (land use, land use change and forestry) includes emissions and sinks 
generated particularly due to the use of forest land being managed and also the use of fields, 
grasslands, wetlands, settlements and other land. Net emissions in the LULUCF sector 
reduced by 243 kt CO  equivalent in 2018, which represents 1.4 per cent of all national 
2
  59 emissions (excluding LULUCF).In the sector’s total balance of emissions and sinks in 2018, 
forest land, settlements, other land and wetlands generated emissions in the amount of 900 
kt CO  equivalent, while grasslands, fields and the obtained timber products generated sinks 
2
in the amount of –662 kt CO  equivalent (Figure 18).In the LULUCF sector’s total balance of 
2
emissions and sinks, it is necessary to observe indirect N O emissions (5 kt CO  equivalent 
2 2
in 2018) due to nitrogen runoff and leaching, which are the result of soil management. Since 
2014, a sharp decline in the sector’s sink has been noted, particularly due to the increased 
felling and mortality of forests resulting from natural disasters (glaze ice in 2014, bark beetles 
between 2015 and 2016, and windstorms in 2017 and 2018), which affected Slovenian 
forests. The share of salvage harvesting in the 2010–2019 period amounted on average to 
45 per cent of the entire felling. Net sinks in the LULUCF sector decreased by 103 per cent in 
2018 compared to 2005. Natural disturbances reduce the forest’s potential as a depository of 
CO  and increase GHG emissions from forests into the atmosphere. In addition to felling, 
2
natural mortality due to bark beetles, which tripled in the 2012–2018 period if compared to 
the 2007–2012 period, also contributed to increased emissions in forests. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18: Balance of GHG emissions and sinks in the LULUCF sector in 2018 (source: 
Slovenian Forestry Institute) 
 
 
 
Forestry and agriculture are the key factors in the LULUCF sector and are, on the one hand, 
directly dependant on climate conditions, while, on the other hand, their role as the providers 
of  environmental  (ecosystem)  services  increased  specifically  due  to  climate  change.  In 
particular,  forests  carry  out  a  type  of  ecosystem  service  with  which  they  mitigate  and 
contribute to the adaptation to climate change. The role of climate is displayed in carbon 
sequestration, mitigation of temperature differences, increase in relative humidity and cooling 
of the air and reduction in wind speed and force. Its role is exceptionally important for filtering 
and  retaining  water,  fixation  of  soil  and  prevention  of  soil  erosion,  and  protection  of 
settlements and infrastructure from avalanches, landslides and falling rocks. Forests also 
clean the air and decrease noise levels in the surrounding area. Due to climate change, it 
can also be expected that natural ecosystems will adjust to new conditions to a certain extent 
(e.g. phenological development of plants, length of the growing period, tree line). If the 
atmosphere continues to grow warmer and the frequency of extreme weather phenomena 
increases, the adaptation to climate change in the use of agricultural land will become even 
more important (e.g. plant breeding, irrigation systems). 
 
In the past, an increase in the area of managed forest land, including the accumulation of 
  60 growing stock, which was prominent in 2007, most affected the flow of net emissions in the 
LULUCF sector. Furthermore, the overgrowing of permanent grassland also affected the sink 
trend. After 2007, sinks in forest land have reduced as the possible and realised felling has 
gradually  increased.  This  was  first  dictated  by  an  amendment  in  forestry  policy,  which 
observed the guideline of the Resolution on National Forest Programme (Official Gazette of 
the Republic of Slovenia [Uradni list RS], No. 111/07) that the planned possible felling should 
reach 75 per cent of the increment. In recent years, natural disasters had quite an impact on 
the amount of the actual felling in forests. 
 
6.6.1.1 Guidelines and measures to be adopted by 2030 
 
The NECP highlights mindful forest management and improvement of sustainable cascading 
use of wood, whereby it must be ensured that the LULUCF sector will not produce net 
emissions by 2030. It is anticipated that the sink in this sector will increase by 6.4 Mt of CO  
2
until 2030 according to the NECP scenario. To attain these objectives, the NECP plans an 
improvement of the system for monitoring carbon stock in all land uses, an upgrade of the 
existing  measures,  adjustment  of  the  objectives  as  per  growing  stock,  felling  and 
accumulation while observing forest adjustment to the expected climate change, provision of 
state incentives and education of forest owners. The NECP emphasises greater processing 
of Slovenian wood and the use of wood of poorer quality for energy purposes, whereby wood 
should be incorporated accordingly in the system, sustainable construction indicators and 
green public procurement. Furthermore, the NECP focuses on agricultural practices which 
increase carbon stock in the soil. 
 
The NECP’s key instruments in the field of LULUCF include the upgrade and implementation 
of forest inventories, development of the methodology for monitoring of sinks, upgrade of 
measures in the sectoral policy, forest management plans of forest management areas 
(2021–2030), state incentives for forest owners for forest care and protection, and education 
and workshops regarding sustainable forest management for forest owners. 
 
The NECP plans the starting points for the formation of additional measures: Resolution: Our 
food, rural areas and natural resources after 2021, the Strategic plan CAP 2021–2027, and 
the Forest Management Plans and Hunting Management Plans for Regions (2021–2030). 
 
6.6.2 Vision 
 
Preservation of sinks and reduction of GHG emissions in forest, agricultural and other land 
by 2050 while observing the ecosystem approach in accordance with the principles of 
multifunctional and sustainable management. Slovenia will promote management methods 
and good practices which accelerate the production of food, fodder, fibres and wood 
biomass  in  accordance  with  the  carrying  capacity  of forest  sites  or  agricultural  land, 
ensure food safety and enhance the stability of forest, agricultural and other ecosystems. 
 
6.6.3 Objective by 2050 
 
The objective of the LULUCF sector in 2050 is a net sink of at least –2,500 kt of CO  
2
equivalent. Whereby it must be ensured that the carbon stock change (calculated as a sink) 
in harvested wood products (i.e. sawn timber, wood panels and paper) is increased by 100 
per cent or to –370 kt of CO  equivalent. Emissions due to expanding settlements or built-up 
2
and similar land are to be reduced by 100 per cent or to 0 kt of CO  equivalent in 2050 as per 
2
the level in 2005. 
 
The LULUCF sector will gravitate in the long term towards sustainable use of land and 
natural resources and the conservation of carbon stock in forests. As per the National Forest 
Programme, the objective is for the possible felling planned in forests at the level of the 
  61 Republic of Slovenia to attain 75 per cent of the increment. The orientation of the same 
programme is to also increase growing stock, which will not be possible in the long term. The 
forest cover and growing stock in Slovenian forests are among the largest in the EU territory. 
Therefore, Slovenia has limited possibilities to increase the sink, which is the result of an 
increase in forest areas or growing stock, in comparison to other EU member states. To 
balance the development phases due to forest ageing, to achieve forest resilience and to 
transform deforested forests into more suitable habitats, felling is planned in the coming 
decades, with forests still providing sinks (e.g. increase in forest floor carbon stock, leaf litter 
and  deadwood).  Slovenia  will  maintain  and  improve  the  exploitation  of  the  production 
potential of forest sites or agricultural land, while ensuring the capacities for wood processing 
with an emphasis on Slovenian wood, production of wood products and food safety. 
 
Climate  change  can  also  significantly  impact  the  trends  in  emissions  and  sinks  in  the 
LULUCF sector. Extreme weather events, such as disasters in forests, may severely affect 
the short-term increase in emissions or the reduction of sinks in the sector. Changes in 
average air temperature, quantities, temporal and spatial arrangement of precipitation, CO  
2
concentrations in the air, etc. affect the growth and development of plants, which may in the 
long-term cause changes in their productivity, species composition and diversity. Changes of 
these environmental parameters may affect the balance between emissions and sinks in the 
sector either negatively or positively. This sector has good potential to contribute to the 
attainment of climate objectives with the approaches of mitigation and adaptation for a 
comprehensive and sustainable land management, including forests. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19: Emission/sink trends in the 2005−2018 period and the anticipated flow until 2050 
(source: Slovenian Forestry Institute) 
 
 
 
Current LULUCF projections reveal that net sinks in the sector will increase until 2030. In 
accordance with the WAM scenario, it would be possible to maintain net sinks at –3.1 Mt of 
CO  equivalent by 2040 or increase them by at least –2.5Mt of CO  equivalent by 2050 
2 2
(Figure 19). It may also be expected as per the WAM scenario that sinks in the LULUCF 
sector  would  gradually  decrease  in  the  2025–2040  period,  especially  due  to  increased 
realisation  of  possible  felling  in  forests.  The  LULUCF  sector  will  not  be  the  source  of 
emissions by 2030 and also by 2050, but it must be pointed out that the calculation rules, 
which are applicable now, are not observed herein. 
  62  
6.6.4 Main orientations 
 
Main orientations of the LULUCF sector are: 
-  preservation and enhancement of carbon stock in forest land in order to ensure 
sustainable forest development as an ecosystem and the largest possible sink; 
-  increase in carbon stock in agricultural soil, conservation of permanent grassland and 
the reduction of emissions generated due to the change in land use, whereby high-
quality agricultural land must be permanently protected and maintained; 
-  promotion of domestic wood processing and production of wood products (e.g. chairs, 
windows),  particularly  those  with  a  good  potential  to  substitute  for  non-renewable 
materials and the use of wood waste and low-quality wood, which can be used for 
energy purposes; 
-  debureaucratisation of forestry and agricultural policies and amendments/harmonisation 
of the existing regulations; 
-  education and training of staff in the sector in the area of mitigation of, and adaptation to, 
climate change; 
-  acquisition of knowledge, transfer of good practices and introduction of technological 
solutions, which contribute to the reduction of GHG emissions relating to forestry and 
agriculture; 
-  implementation of suitable measures in biodiversity protection with an emphasis on the 
improvement and restoration of ecosystems, primarily of those measures which are 
planned in the governmental Natura 2000 Management Programme and which do not 
contribute to GHG emissions. 
 
The main objectives and sub-objectives in the LULUCF sector are: 
-  maintenance and increase of sinks and carbon stock in biomass and soil; 
-  processing of domestic wood and production of wood products; 
-  food and fodder production; 
-  reduction in the spread of settlements or the level of development; 
-  conservation of biodiversity; 
-  exploitation of the potential to store carbon in forest and agricultural soil; 
-  provision of biomaterials to substitute for fossil and carbon-intensive materials. 
 
When designing methodologies and determining rules or methods for calculating emissions 
and  sinks  in  the  LULUCF  sector,  Slovenia  must  be  more  active  in  its  approach  to 
international cooperation at the level of the UNFCCC and provide permanent representatives 
when negotiating at the EU level. 
 
6.6.5 Main fields of action 
 
Slovenia will continue with sustainable forest management until 2050 while observing and 
ensuring all forest functions with an emphasis on maintaining and increasing sinks and 
carbon stock in biomass, soil and harvested wood products. Key measures for forest land 
include: 
-  enhancement of forest resilience by optimising age structure and tree composition of 
forests, including the converting of spruce monocultures, protection of forest soil and 
removal of invasive alien species; 
-  prevention of deforestation in suburban and agricultural landscapes; 
-  preventive measures and forest fire protection; 
-  enhancement of natural climate solutions by identifying reserves, eco-cells and habitat 
trees, and the conservation of water biotopes in forests; 
-  establishment of nurseries to ensure suitable planting material of native and 
provenance-appropriate tree species for artificial reforestation; 
-  provision of high-quality wood in the entire forest-wood chain. 
 
  63 With regard to use of agricultural land, Slovenia will strive to implement agricultural practices 
which contribute to the increase of sinks and the reduction of carbon dioxide and nitrous 
oxide emissions while observing food safety. Key measures for agricultural land include: 
-  use of farming systems which increase carbon stock in the soil (e.g. conservation tillage, 
use  of  cover  crops)  and  those  that  preserve  agricultural  areas  which  have  large 
quantities of stored carbon (marshes, wetlands, etc.); 
-  use of agricultural land which ensures resilient and biodiverse ecosystems 
(e.g. hedges, diverse meadows, high-trunk orchards, riparian vegetation); 
-  investments in agricultural technologies and modernisation of farming systems for 
efficient use of nutrients and improvement of agricultural resilience to climate change 
(e.g. erosion reduction, irrigation systems, precision farming by optimising the application 
of fertilisers and plant protection products); 
-  adjustment of tillage technologies by observing the relief, including spatial optimisation of 
agricultural land (e.g. rearrangement of fields on flat areas and grasslands to steeper 
sections); 
-  prevention of plant cultivation for biofuel production. 
 
Other important measures in the LULUCF sector are: 
-  modernisation  of  technologies  in  the  entire  forest-wood  value  chain,  including 
investments in primary wood processing, financial incentives and support for farmers 
and foresters (as key stakeholders) that are linked to results; 
-  substitution of carbon-intensive materials with wood (e.g. construction with wood) and 
production of new and sustainable biological products, such as biochemicals (e.g. textile, 
bioplastics and composite materials); 
-  protection of wetlands and revitalisation of wet meadows which are not managed; 
-  smart spatial planning, including the observance of land quality; 
-  financing of research involving new bio-based materials; 
-  inclusion of climate objectives in sectoral policies (the national forestry programme is 
being drafted). 
 
 
6.6.6 Key factors for attaining target emissions by 2050 
 
To attain target emissions in the sector, the following factors are of key importance: 
- maintenance and increase in carbon stock and sinks in forests for which it will be necessary 
to: 
a) optimise the age structure and tree composition of forests; 
b) expedient introduction of mature tree stands into revitalisation, including the shortage 
of production periods of carrier or key tree species; 
c) restore degraded forests and rehabilitate those damaged in natural disasters; 
d) improve the realisation of forest management plans, including a more active 
implementation of silvicultural and protection works, especially in private forests; 
-  increase  carbon  stock  in  harvested  wood  products,  which  will  only  be  possible  by 
increasing investments in the wood processing industry, particularly in primary wood 
processing, such as sawmills, wood processing centres and veneer mills; 
-  manage the expansion of settlements or the scope of growth of built-up land and 
promotion of renovation. 
 
 
6.6.7 Human resources 
 
For  efficient  preservation  or  increase  of  sinks  and  mitigation  of  climate  change  in  the 
LULUCF sector, it is necessary to increase management and expert capacities. The transfer 
and exchange of knowledge, experience, data and information in Slovenia and with other 
countries must be enhanced. The content of syllabuses or studies within educational and 
study  programmes  must  be  adjusted,  so  that  more  topics  will  be  intended  to  enhance 
  64 knowledge regarding the possibilities for mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change in 
the sector. When forming vocational and expert education in the field of agriculture and 
forestry,  the  competent  ministries  play  an  important  role,  as  they  are  responsible  for 
education  planning  and  implementation  in  Slovenia.  The  state  will  have  to  incorporate 
additional  content  in  the  programmes  of  informal  education  and  training  (e.g.  the 
Employment Service of Slovenia, the Chamber of Agriculture and Forestry of Slovenia, the 
Slovenia  Forest  Service)  in  a  sensible  way  to  enhance  knowledge  and  skills  when 
implementing specific measures for increasing sinks and reducing emissions in practice. To 
enhance human resources and attain long-term effects, investment and a systemic approach 
at  all  levels  of  formal  and  informal  education  will  be  required.  Forest  owners  have  an 
important role when implementing measures and with regard to rural development. As a 
result, their education and training involving sustainable forest management and use of wood 
are  extremely  important.  From  this  aspect,  Slovenia  will  strive  for  the  acquisition  of 
knowledge and competence in the area, such as forest management, promotion of the use of 
wood and competitiveness of the forest-wood chain, sustainable and environmentally friendly 
use of land, smart spatial planning and circular bioeconomy. 
 
 
6.6.8 Proposed progress monitoring indicators 
 
-  Net GHG emissions, 
-  net GHG emissions due to land use change with sub-indicators: 
a) GHG emissions due to deforestation; 
b) GHG emissions due to land use change into built-up and similar land; 
-  area of restored forests as per the type of restoration; 
-  ratio of forest development phases; 
-  area of restored forests with an improved biodiversity status. 
 
 
6.7  Other sectors: waste, agricultural machinery 
 
6.7.1 Waste 
 
Emissions  from  waste  will  reduce  by  81  per  cent  in  2050  in  comparison  to  2005.The 
attainment of reduced emissions in the waste sector is linked to further implementation of 
measures  included  in  the  already  existing  documents,  the  Operational  plan  for  waste 
management from 2016, which already governs the field of generation, handling and disposal 
of solid waste, the Operational programme for the discharge and treatment of urban waste 
water and the ReNPVO20-30. These documents will be supplemented as per the guidelines 
in the national environmental protection programme. The reduction in emissions from waste 
disposal will be attained with the cessation of disposal of biodegradable waste. The second 
largest emissions source in the waste sector is wastewater treatment, in which emissions will 
be reduced by households’ connection to the sewage network with wastewater treatment 
plants  and  replacement  of  septic  tanks  with  small  wastewater  treatment  plants.  GHG 
emissions are also generated in the waste sector through thermal treatment of waste in 
which mostly hazardous waste is treated, as the emissions from thermal treatment of waste 
for energy purposes are included in the energy sector, and from waste composting in which 
emissions are low. 
 
Waste management requires the realisation of other objectives included in the ReNPVO20-
30: reduction of the quantity of waste generated, its maximum reuse, which results in lower 
emissions  in  production  and  the  attainment  of  self-sufficiency  when  ensuring  waste 
management, which includes increased capacities of thermal treatment of the remaining 
waste for energy purposes, resulting in lower emissions due to fuel combustion because of 
fossil fuels replacement and reduction in emissions linked to waste transport. 
  65  
Figure  20:  Actual  emissions  in  the  2005−2018  period  and  the  indicative  trajectory  of 
emissions until 2050 as per the WAM scenario (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef 
Stefan Institute) 
 
 
 
6.7.2 Agricultural machinery 
 
GHG emissions arising from the use of machinery in agriculture are reduced by 94 per cent 
in the projection with ambitious additional measures until 2050, which is significantly more 
than in the projection with the existing measures in which the emissions are lower by 30 per 
cent. The reduction of emissions is the result of a number of measures. The energy use in 
machinery will drop by 30 per cent as a result of more efficient machinery, new technologies 
and minimised tillage. The structure of fuels will also change. Today, diesel fuel represents a 
100-per cent share, which will be reduced by 58 per cent by 2050. It will be replaced by 
biodiesel (30 per cent), biomethane (7 per cent) and compressed natural gas (6 per cent). As 
in other sectors, liquid and gaseous fossil fuels will be replaced with synthetic fuels which will 
be CO  neutral. 
  2
 
 
 
Figure  21:  Actual  emissions  in  the  2005−2018  period  and  the  indicative  trajectory  of 
  66 emissions until 2050 as per the WAM scenario (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef 
Stefan Institute) 
 
7  HORIZONTAL ISSUES 
 
7.1  Consumer and production processes for a low-carbon circular economy 
 
The attainment of climate neutrality and a circular economy requires an overall mobilisation 
of  society  because  the  transition’s  success  is  possible  only  with  radical  and  systemic 
changes  of  consumer  and  production  patterns,  low-carbon  technologies,  extensive 
digitalisation of the economy and the prominent sustainable orientation of society. 
 
With the exception of wood, there is lack of natural resources in Slovenia; on average, we 
import 71 per cent of raw materials, which makes imports dependant on availability and quite 
vulnerable to change. Resource productivity is below the EU average in Slovenia. The 
Slovenian economy depends on the import of raw materials; aggravated access to the latter 
and price volatility on global markets could significantly lead to Slovenia lagging behind when 
implementing measures for the transition to a circular economy. The foregoing combined with 
import dependency on natural resources and low reuse of waste material in the long term 
denote a relatively great pressure on the competitiveness of Slovenian companies. 
 
Slovenia has placed a circular economy among strategic development priorities. Certain 
guidelines for Slovenia’s transition to a circular economy were drawn. The circular economy 
is linked with the objectives of sustainable development and is observed in key national 
documents (Slovenia’s Vision 2050, SDS 2030 and the Smart Specialisation Strategy). The 
justification  for  the  urgency  of  the  circular  transition  was  summarised  in  the  Slovenian 
Framework  Programme  for  the  Transition  to  a  Green  Economy  from  October  2015. 
Incentives  observing the  application  of the  2013–2020  cohesion funds  included  a  large 
number  of  economic  operators  but  were  carried  out  with  no  clear  monitoring  and  the 
evaluation of effects with suitable indicators by means of which the effectiveness of the 
transition to a low-carbon circular economy could be assessed. 
 
A new Circular Economy Action Plan (2020) was drafted within the EGD, which together with 
A New Industrial Strategy for Europe (2020) will contribute to the upgrade of the EU economy 
and the exploitation of opportunities provided by a circular economy. The key objectives are 
to promote the development of leading markets for climate-neutral and circular products in 
the EU and beyond, encourage new business models, ensure support for the circular design 
of re-usable, sustainable and repairable products, reduce the quantity of materials used and 
reuse  them  before  recycling.  The  concept  of  extended  producer  responsibility  will  be 
enhanced and the ‘right to repair’ will be enforced. Consumer policy will contribute to the 
empowerment of consumers so they will be able to make thoughtful decisions and play an 
active role in the sustainable transition. 
 
The key challenge is thus a green, sustainable and circular development of the economy by 
establishing measures which enable a development with greater resource efficiency and 
reduction of GHG emissions, and to simultaneously improve competitiveness with efficiency 
and innovations and promote development and employment. 
 
As  the  circular  economy  is  about  horizontal  connectivity  between  various  sectors,  the 
harmonisation between those various sectors will be crucial for a successful transition to a 
low-carbon society. Slovenia will thus form a systemic approach which will mutually integrate 
and  enrich  various  programmes  and  projects,  and  seek  necessary  synergies  between 
various  sectors  and  fields  and  with  regard  to  financing.  Slovenia  will  establish  suitable 
conditions for an integrated (co)operation of all relevant stakeholders in research, innovation, 
education and entrepreneurship. The key players in this transition will be the competent 
ministries, business (industry) associations, consumer organisations, industrial and service 
  67 sector, financial institutions, research and development institutions and society as a whole 
because, for the most part, changes in people’s habits are involved. 
 
The  systemic  approach  will  include  suitable  multilevel  management  with  an  installed 
feedback loop of ongoing learning and adjusting to the implementation and will be based on 
own experience and will draw from new global scientific findings. To help attain such a 
systemic transition, Slovenia will apply services in the field of systemic innovations, which is 
why it has connected with European technological institutions (EIT Climate-KIC and JRC – 
Joint  Research  Centre)  and  is  drafting  a  concept  proposal  for  the  comprehensive 
decarbonisation of Slovenia through the transition to a circular economy. 
 
 
7.1.1 Guidelines and measures adopted until 2030 
 
The circular economy is mentioned in several strategic documents as one of the main 
carriers of sustainable economic development in the future. Within its eighth development 
objective, i.e. transition to a low-carbon circular economy, the SDS 2030 determines three 
adopted objectives for monitoring the attainment of the objective set: 
-  material productivity – to attain the target value of 3.5 of purchasing power standard 
(PPS)/kg by 2030 (in comparison to the baseline value of 1.79 PPS/kg in 2015); 
-  proportion of renewable sources in final energy consumption – attain the target value of 
27 per cent by 2030 (in comparison to the baseline value of 22 per cent in 2015); 
-  emission productivity – attain the EU average in 2030 (in comparison to the baseline 
value of 2.9 PPS/kg of CO  in 2105). 
2
In September 2015, the Government of the Republic of Slovenia adopted the Slovenian 
Smart Specialisation Strategy (S4), which is the implementation plan for the transition to a 
high-productivity economy by enhancing innovation capacities, promoting transformation and 
diversification  of  industries  into  new  activities  and  the  growth  of  new  and  fast-growing 
companies. The S4 defines three priority pillars (the second pillar is circularity) and nine 
areas of application in which Slovenia can reach a critical mass of knowledge, capabilities 
and competence, and thus possess the innovation potential for positioning in global markets. 
 
In the NECP, a circular economy is incorporated in the scope of "reducing emissions" with 
the key commitment to support companies for an efficient and competitive transition to a 
climate-neutral  and  circular  economy  by  improving  energy  and  material  efficiency  in  all 
sectors (and thus reduce the use of energy and other natural resources), as the first and key 
measure for the transition to a circular low-carbon economy and climate-neutral society with 
measures and policies in the economy, including non-reimbursable financial incentives for 
measures  of  reducing  process  emissions  in  industry  and  non-reimbursable  financial 
incentives for measures of reducing GHG emissions in industry with the measures of a 
circular economy. 
 
Regarding the circular economy, the funds  anticipated for  the  implementation  of  NECP 
measures are included in the measures intended in the economy for direct implementation of 
activities for the transition to a circular low-carbon economy and educational and research 
activities. 
 
The  measures  anticipated  continue  and  spread  the  support  for  the  renovation  of  the 
economy and society in the direction of a low-carbon circular economy. Various incentive 
measures being implemented in the present and which will also be implemented in the future 
will direct incentives towards a circular economy by adapting conditions and criteria. 
 
 
 
 
 
  68 7.1.2 Vision 
 
Contributing to a significant reduction of emissions in all economic activities by means of a 
transition to a low-carbon circular economy and changes in social behaviour and habits. 
Contributing to a sustainable social transformation of consumer habits. The framework of 
sustainable policies will include the sustainable design of products, enhancing the role of 
consumers  and  buyers  through  public  procurements  and  circularity  of  production 
processes,  which  will  result  in  significant  savings  along  entire  value  chains,  the 
supervision of resource tracking and the promotion of green technology application. 
 
 
7.1.3 Objective by 2050 
 
The objectives of the transition to a low-carbon circular economy by 2050 are included in 
common and sectoral targets. The circular economy is a horizontal area and as such it 
provides the framework for implementing activities and attaining the objectives for emissions 
reduction by 2050. 
 
7.1.4 Main orientations and fields of action by 2050 
 
The transition to a low-carbon circular economy will only be possible with radical changes in 
society  and  the  economy  and  innovations  in  current  approaches  and  a  simultaneous 
approach at different levels of society. 
 
The transition to a low-carbon circular economy is not a task Slovenia could tackle on its 
own, but one which requires a joint engagement of the international community, especially 
the  EC,  in  the  drafting  and  guiding  of  legislative  policies  and  various  international 
programmes, e.g. Horizon Europe, bilateral programmes and future comparable programmes 
of various institutions. 
 
The transition to a circular economy is already underway in Slovenia, the EU and elsewhere 
in the world, and the activities for an overall transition to a low-carbon circular economy are 
actually a continuation and expansion of existing activities which are more comprehensively 
managed and integrated into broader economic and social flows. Slovenia will join in with 
and implement activities proposed by the new European circular economy action plan, i.e.: 
-  participate in the formation and adoption of binding legislative requirements about 
sustainable products in the EU; 
-  enhance the role of consumers and observe the circular economy in public procurement; 
-  focus on the sectors that use the most resources and in which circulation potential is 
great; 
-  limit the generation of waste and allow its transformation into high-quality secondary 
resources; 
-  integrate the efforts for circular operations and integration of people, regions and towns; 
-  participate in global efforts in the field of the circular economy. 
 
Considering the fact that the EC will, in accordance with the EGD, enhance the monitoring of 
national plans and measures to accelerate the transition to a circular economy, Slovenia will 
update such a programme and gradually integrate it with other strategic documents, i.e. 
industry (or economic) policies, promotion of companies and particularly small and medium-
sized enterprises, and green public procurement. 
 
The  measures  will  focus  on  sustainable  consumption  and  production,  research  and 
innovation support and will provide new opportunities for eco-innovative companies. Slovenia 
will  tackle  the  greatest  challenges  in  the  field  of  production  patterns,  particularly  when 
abandoning unsustainable products and improving the general environmental efficiency of 
products throughout their entire life cycle. 
  69  
The transition to a low-carbon circular economy in Slovenia will be systemic, thorough and 
transformative. Due to the complexity of the approach and inclusion of all social sectors and 
players, the approach will have to incorporate all aspects and make sure that burdens are 
distributed fairly. Slovenia will promote the harmonisation and cooperation of all interested 
parties at all levels, i.e. international, the EU, national, regional and local levels. Furthermore, 
the transition to a circular economy also has important benefits for health (less pollution), 
quality of life, competitiveness and resilience of the economy and society to external impact. 
Successful  implementation  of  a  circular  economy  also  has  positive  effects  on  transport 
(reduced 
transport sector). 
 
Slovenia is aware of the challenge of transforming society and the economy into a low-
carbon circular economy and understands it is one of the essential available instruments for 
the sustainable use of natural resources and emission reduction. Together with the EIT, its 
knowledge  and  innovation  communities  and  the  EC  (JRC),  Slovenia  approached  the 
formation of the Comprehensive strategic project of the decarbonisation of Slovenia through 
a transition to a circular economy. In the multi-annual process involving all key ministries, a 
project is being drafted which is also unique in the European sphere and requires the 
harmonised functioning of the entire Government of the Republic of Slovenia and numerous 
stakeholders from all sectors and at all levels. Relating to the transition to a low-carbon 
circular economy, the project will establish synergies between funds and instruments at the 
EU  and  national  levels  which  will  enhance  and  systemically  connect  the  efforts  and 
incentives already carried out in Slovenia in the field of the transition to a low-carbon circular 
economy, and will introduce new innovative approaches and solutions in Slovenia by means 
of which the challenges of this transition will more easily transform into opportunities and 
establish a development model compliant with environmental objectives and the attainment 
of net zero emissions by 2050. 
 
The content of the proposed solutions will be structured in multilayer sets composed of 
several  vertical  and  horizontal  programmes  which  will  be  mutually  connected  and  will 
enhance and upgrade one another: 
-  awareness and competence for the transition to a circular society; 
-  drafting of education programmes of knowledge centres and development programmes, 
and the promotion of elements of the circular economy and society in communities at 
national, regional and local levels with a special emphasis on the transformation of 
consumer patterns; 
-  direct promotion of the circular economic development in all economic branches with a 
special focus on energy-intensive processes and circularity, intensive support for small 
and medium-sized enterprises and the preparation of bases for the development of new 
entrepreneurial ideas and public-private partnership; 
-  formation  of  policies  and  organisation  of  the  circular  low-carbon  society  with  a 
preparation of legislative and incentive mechanisms which will directly steer circularly 
oriented purchasing processes and simultaneously address the functioning of public 
structures, private investors and research and academic institutions; 
-  formation of new business models and promotion of market development by introducing 
sustainable business models to expand the offer of services related to the offer of 
products and thus enhance the added value and competitiveness in these activities. 
 
When directing its efforts towards a low-carbon circular economy, Slovenia will focus on 
several economic systems or value chains which were recognised in the process of expert 
and political assessment as crucial for the transition to a low-carbon circular economy. The 
advantage  of  value  chains  lies  in  the  possibility  of  integrating  different  activities  into 
comprehensive  programmes  and  in  the  application  of  various  innovative  incentive 
mechanisms. Key value chains recognised include: 
-  wood chain, 
  70 -  sustainable construction, 
-  mobility, 
-  manufacturing, 
-  food chain. 
 
For successful implementation, Slovenia  will establish various methods of ensuring and 
combining  financial  resources  from  all  available  sources  (European,  international  and 
national resources, either public or private). Furthermore, it will update the framework for 
monitoring  a  circular  economy.  New  indicators,  which  will  be  based  on  the  European 
statistics to the greatest degree possible, will  observe the main fields from the circular 
economy action plan and links between circularity, climate neutrality and zero pollution. To 
this end, Slovenia will determine indicators on resource use, including consumption and 
material footprints, to observe the use of materials and environmental impact relating to 
production and consumption patterns. These indicators will play an important role when 
monitoring and assessing the progress in separating economic growth from resource use 
and its impact in the EU and outside of it. 
 
 
7.1.5 Key factors of a circular low-carbon economy by 2050 
 
Key factors and instruments for the attainment of objectives relating to the transition to a low-
carbon circular economy are: 
-  increase in material efficiency with the use of less materials, design of products with a 
longer lifespan, possibility of repair and longer product life, use of materials produced 
with fewer emissions and which can be recycled, reuse of materials and recycling, and 
product sharing; 
-  reduce waste in production, packaging and the entire supply chain from "the cradle to 
the grave" and throughout the entire lifespan, and integration and cooperation between 
various industries in which one industry’s waste is a raw material for another industry. 
Arrangement of special legislation in the field of secondary raw materials; 
-  social research of consumer habits with a focus on a circular economy; 
-  establishment of suitable price signals and integration of external costs in product prices, 
such as product evaluation as per its environmental and social footprint (CO  footprint); 
2
-  preparation  and  implementation  of  measures  from  strategic  documents,  such  as 
preparation of a comprehensive plan for planning, introducing, financing and monitoring 
the transition to a circular economy, including a preparation of the national circular 
economy plan in compliance with the European Circular Economy Action Plan, strategic 
plans for industrial and economic policies, strategic development plans and financing 
methods in all sectors connected through a circular economy; 
-  transposition of the EC’s legislative orientations relating to the elements of the transition 
to a circular economy and supplementation/harmonisation of regulations regarding green 
public procurement and taxonomy towards the observance of the circular economy’s 
principles; 
-  efficient drawing of funds from various resources (EU funds, the Climate Change Fund, 
bilateral agreements, research and development projects). 
 
7.1.6 Human resources 
 
Slovenia is aware of the lack of human resources in the field of the circular economy, which 
encompasses an exceptionally heterogeneous field and which must be considered as such. 
To this end, a comprehensive strategic project of Slovenia’s decarbonisation through the 
transition to a circular economy is already being formed, the important part of which is an 
increase in awareness, education and attainment of competence of a broad circle of players 
and systems from the public and private education system to public and private business 
organisations,  public  administration,  and  the  academic  and  research  sphere.  Based  on 
comparable investment, green jobs have better effects on employment, while the educational 
  71 structure and economic effects grow. Within the framework of implementing activities on the 
basis of strategic orientations, several pilot cases of education, awareness raising and other 
activities will be carried out in the coming years, which will serve as the basis for future 
human resources development as per the experience obtained. 
 
7.1.7 Proposed progress monitoring indicators 
 
Due  to  the  complexity  of  the  influential  parameters  indicating  the  effectiveness  of  the 
transition  to  a  low-carbon  circular  economy,  Slovenia  will  establish  an  efficient  and 
comprehensive monitoring system which will be based on several parameters and indicators. 
It will become involved in the preparation of the framework for monitoring a circular economy 
at the EU level and thus harmonise national and European circularity indicators which the EC 
will adopt for monitoring the key trends and samples of the circular economy’s elements in 
order to comparatively define the success factors in member states and assess whether the 
measures adopted are suitable. 
-  Production and consumption indicators (use of raw materials and energy products, self-
sufficiency in the field of raw materials and materials, municipal waste, other waste (food, 
agriculture)); 
-  waste management (recycling rate, recycling rate of specific waste flows, packaging); 
-  secondary raw materials (proportions of recycling materials in input material, shops with 
recycling materials, etc.); 
-  competitiveness, innovation, economy (private sector investment, jobs, 
added value, start-up companies, patents and innovations, etc.); 
-  monitoring indicators of the legislative sustainability framework (effectiveness of 
implementation of circular economy policies). 
 
 
7.1.8 Food consumption patterns 
 
In 2018, agriculture contributed almost 10 per cent of all GHG emissions. The largest share 
of emissions in agriculture is attributed to methane produced by ruminants. The majority of 
emissions arising from agriculture cannot be addressed by technological solutions. Their 
reduction can only be attained by changing patterns of food consumption and thus our habits 
or consumption patterns. 
 
Slovenia will promote the consumption of food of plant and animal origin as per the health 
guidelines of the National Institute of Public Health (NIJZ), which means the consumption of 
less meat because Slovenians on average consume too much meat, and especially too 
many meat products. 
 
As stated by the NIJZ, "a varied diet also includes meat in moderate quantities because meat 
is an important source of protein of high biological value. Because meat products also consist 
of substances that may be harmful to health, their consumption should be limited." According 
to the latest data of the NIJZ, adult Slovenians consume on average 1.23 kg of meat and 
meat products a week. The NIJZ recommends a consumption of between 300 and 500 
grams of various types of high-quality lean meat per week and occasionally meat products. 
The NIJZ also warns that the consumption of more than 300 grams of meat products and red 
meat each week already poses a risk for health. Slovenia will promote the replacement of 
meat particularly with legumes, which can be substituted accordingly for other non-meat food 
of animal origin, e.g. milk, dairy products and eggs. 
 
Locally grown food will also be supported as it is more accessible when in season. It ensures 
food self-sufficiency and is of better quality because fruit and vegetables can be harvested at 
the time of optimum maturity due to short transport routes, resulting in better flavour and 
higher nutritional value. 
 
  72 Slovenia will support an increase in local supply and thus the supply to households, public 
institutions, etc. of sustainably produced food, which ensures a diet compliant with dietary 
guidelines. Such incentives will indirectly improve food variety, reduce the environmental 
burden, contribute to rural development, ensure jobs and directly impact the health and social 
and economic situation of the economy. 
 
7.2 Education and training 
 
Education (formal and informal) and training at all levels are the key to an efficient transition 
to climate neutrality. For the most part, individual sectoral chapters already highlight and 
address the lack of necessary knowledge in Slovenia. It is also evident that suitable human 
resources are crucial for the implementation of measures. New knowledge is also necessary 
for new green jobs. New diverse knowledge will be necessary for the transition to climate 
neutrality, which will be based on a large number of disciplines, and new, different skills will 
be required. Slovenia will acknowledge this, and it will enhance and promote climate content 
in  education  programmes  of  natural,  technical,  social  sciences  and  humanities  studies. 
Interdisciplinarity will be particularly encouraged. It will promote and actively participate in the 
development of competence for sustainable development and climate change anticipated in 
the EGD. 
 
Learning  and  the  importance  of  climate  change  will  be  systematically  integrated  at  all 
educational  levels,  i.e.  primary,  secondary  and  tertiary  education  and  also  in  informal 
education. 
 
The topic of climate change is included in the broader concept of education called the 
education  for  sustainable  development  (ESD).  The  current  White  Paper  (from  2011) 
highlighted that sustainable development "requires a change in the paradigm of knowledge 
and values" and the principle of sustainable development should become one of the key 
principles of education in Slovenia. As stated in the ReNPVO20-30, it is assessed that these 
recommendations were not observed accordingly. 
 
The update of the ESD national guidelines is anticipated no later than by 2022. In the 
processes of updating syllabi, curricula and knowledge catalogues with an emphasis on 
digital and green (sustainable) content planned within the framework of the national recovery 
plan 2021–2026, Slovenia will make significant progress when observing the representation 
of content and objectives in the field of climate change in the entire educational vertical. 
 
In the broader context of objectives and principles of education for sustainable development, 
climate  objectives  and  content  will  be  integrated  in  an  institutional  manner  and  as 
comprehensively as possible in educational institutions in the future (also including changes 
at  the  level  of  everyday  life  habits  and  work  in  kindergartens  and  schools,  school 
infrastructure, etc.). To this end, a three-year development project, Climate Objectives and 
Content in Education, is being planned within the expenditure programme of the Climate 
Change Fund 2020–2023 in cooperation with the Ministry of the Environment and Spatial 
Planning and all key public institutions in the field of education (the National Education 
Institute of the Republic of Slovenia, the Institute of the Republic of Slovenia for Vocational 
Education and Training, the Slovenian Institute for Adult Education, the Centre for School 
and Outdoor Education, and the National School of Leadership in Education). The project’s 
main task is to draft and test the comprehensive programme of awareness and education 
regarding climate objectives and content within the context of ESD. Each public institute will 
prepare and test the programme in accordance with their level or field of education. This 
project is connected with two new projects in the field of primary and secondary schools, 
adult  education  and  lifelong  learning,  i.e.  "Circular  schools"  and  "Circular  learning  and 
resources," which are planned in Slovenia within the coordinated initiative for the transition to 
a low-carbon circular economy. All anticipated activities will also integrate the content relating 
to climate change. At the end of 2020, Slovenia joined the GLOBE international educational 
  73 programme intended to integrate the educational and research spheres when determining 
the condition of the environment and climate change. The competent ministries will further 
support  and  organise  cooperation  with  various  expert  associations,  including  educators’ 
associations (from primary to tertiary level). 
 
A development and strategic document in the field of education is also being contemplated in 
which the green agenda will be one of the important ministerial orientations and contents in 
education. Special and systematic care will be dedicated to the field of climate change in the 
future. 
 
The training plan for the transition to a low-carbon society will be drafted within the LIFE IP 
CARE4CLIMATE project (in progress). Within this project, the capacities for the transition to 
a low-carbon society in the field of high and higher education are also being enhanced. 
 
7.2.1 Awareness-raising and information dissemination 
 
The 2019 public opinion survey, Eurobarometer, revealed that citizens of the European 
Union believe that climate change should be the main priority of the European Parliament. 
Slovenians put the combat against climate change and environmental conservation in third 
place (24 per cent) of the Parliament’s priorities. Slovenians defined climate change as the 
second  largest  environmental  challenge  (37  per  cent).  Some  76  per  cent  of  citizens 
understand climate change as a severe problem. The results revealed that Slovenians see 
climate change as important and their support when adopting policies and measures for a 
transition to climate neutrality is necessary. As a result, Slovenia will continue to inform and 
raise awareness about climate change and the transition to climate neutrality at all levels. It 
will  raise  awareness  and  disseminate  information  about  the  latest  scientific  findings, 
individuals’ impact on the climate and how they can reduce their impact, the changes in 
consumer patterns, etc. Based on information, people will be able to demand that decision-
makers adopt decisions that are beneficial for the environment. 
 
7.3 Guidelines for cultural heritage protection for the adaptation to, and mitigation of, 
climate change 
 
Current findings reveal that climate change has a direct effect in the conservation of cultural 
heritage. As emphasised by the European Agenda for Culture, cultural heritage is a priority of 
the European cultural cooperation and a strategic resource for a sustainable Europe. 
The  Sendai  Framework  for  Disaster  Risk  Reduction  2015–2030  also  places  heritage 
protection among the priorities and calls on the national authorities to become aware of its 
endangerment.  The  European  Cultural  Heritage  Strategy  for  the  21st  Century  (2017) 
emphasises the new role of heritage and innovative approaches which contribute to the 
improvement of the environment and the quality of life of Europeans. Guidelines for its 
management  set  challenges  and  recommend  measures  which  should  be  observed  by 
governments, local communities, civil society, the business sector and experts. 
 
The Davos Declaration (2018) supports a joint and comprehensive European policy to attain 
a high-quality sustainably built environment. The objectives include cultural heritage and 
contemporary architecture. 
 
The ICOMOS document of the Climate Change and Cultural Heritage Working Group (2019) 
highlights the importance of a comprehensive heritage discussion, especially of the issue of 
migrations in connection with climate change and identity loss. The principles of an inclusive 
society and participation, formation of new approaches and the provision of equality and 
climate  justice  are  crucial  for  the  realisation  of  heritage  objectives  of  sustainable 
development. 
 
  74 Slovenia adopted the Cultural Heritage Strategy 2020–2023 (2019). The Strategy is based 
on the principle of comprehensive heritage conservation as the foundation for Slovenia’s 
national identity and cultural diversity with an exceptional landscape and biodiversity. As per 
Article  5  of  the  Constitution  of  the  Republic  of  Slovenia,  the  state  is  responsible  for 
preserving natural wealth and cultural heritage, and it creates opportunities for a balanced 
civilisational and cultural development of Slovenia. 
 
7.3.1 Situation and challenges for cultural heritage conservation 
 
Some  30,000  immovable  heritage  units  of  various  types,  such  as  cultural  landscape, 
archaeological sites, buildings, settlements, machines and devices, industrial complexes, 
monuments and memorials, parks and gardens are entered in the Register of Slovenian 
Cultural Heritage. The Register of Intangible Cultural Heritage consists of 86 units and 238 
holders of intangible heritage. Slovenia’s heritage is an important part of UNESCO World 
Heritage. Two areas are entered in the World Heritage List and dry stone walling is, among 
other things, on the UNESCO Representative List of the Intangible Cultural Heritage of 
Humanity. 
 
Despite the institutional division of treatment and responsibilities, cultural and natural heritage 
are inseparable and should be understood as such and addressed within climate change 
measures. 
 
In recent decades, devastating natural disasters (e.g. floods, high tides, storms) have also 
affected cultural heritage more and more frequently. 
 
Sustainable  resource  management  includes  energy  efficiency  and  heritage  protection. 
Examples of good practice include energy renovation of schools and other public buildings 
from cohesion funds, including heritage buildings. Energy renovation of buildings constructed 
before 1940 can contribute to savings of up to 180 million tonnes of CO  emissions a year, 
2
which  amounts  to  3.6  per  cent  of  all  emissions.  Comprehensive  energy  renovations  of 
heritage buildings are carried out in compliance with the Rules on efficient use of energy in 
buildings with a technical guideline (PURES) and the requirements stipulated by the Energy 
Performance of Buildings Directive. 
 
Knowledge from natural sciences, social sciences and humanities must be observed for a 
comprehensive,  balanced  and  sustainable  heritage  conservation  and  management.  A 
multidisciplinary approach is a challenge, condition and necessity when designing heritage 
and climate sciences. 
 
7.3.2 Measures in the field of cultural heritage for the adaptation to, and mitigation of, 
climate change 
 
Measures which develop innovative and preventive mechanisms are vital for overall heritage 
protection  and  conservation  within  the  framework  of  climate  change.  In  the  process  of 
climate change, three fields are crucial: 
-  Society: intersectoral and interministerial integration, awareness raising and inclusion of 
the public. 
-  Development: observance of the sustainability aspect, quality of the environment and 
space, and innovations. 
-  Knowledge: identification, planning, research, knowledge transfer, integration and 
implementation. 
 
Slovenia  will strive to support substantive and financial mechanisms which will observe 
cultural heritage when reducing the concentration of greenhouse gas emissions, risks of 
accidents and other impacts of climate change. It will promote research for monitoring the 
impact of climate and socially economic changes on heritage communities and research of 
  75 preventive conservation procedures. Slovenia will support identification and digitalisation of 
endangered cultural heritage. 
 
It will further strive to ensure financial incentives for the renovation of architectural heritage 
and advocate the advantage of renovation before new construction. It will promote measures 
for maintaining the settlement pattern, ratios between developed and undeveloped areas, 
preservation of use or reuse of buildings, improvement of fire and seismic safety, and energy 
efficiency. 
 
The measures of cultural heritage protection and conservation must also be observed when 
promoting  mobility.  Slovenia  will  pursue  the  improvements  of  spatial  attractiveness  of 
settlements and cultural landscape by providing basic and advanced living needs. It will strive 
for a balanced urban and rural development with digitalisation, social innovations and smart 
specialisation which upgrade the inherited cultural heritage values. 
 
8  FINANCING 
 
8.1  Assessments of required investments 
 
To attain the objective of climate neutrality, Slovenia will direct earmarked investments in a 
suitable and timely manner. Such an objective cannot be attained solely by means of the 
existing  measures.  The  NECP  sets  the  foundation  for  the  Strategy  by  2030.  The  key 
emphasis is on the implementation of measures whose continuity must be ensured by 2050 
and onwards. 
 
Required investments 
 
The short-term objectives set by the NECP until 2030 are the basis or the foundation on 
which the attainment of net zero emissions by 2050 is possible. The investments assessed 
do  not  include  a  full  transition  to  the  attainment  of  net  zero  emissions,  but  provide  a 
framework of necessary investments. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  76  
Table  3:  Assessed  scope  of  investments  for  the  scenarios  with  ambitious  additional 
measures (2021–2050) (source: Energy Efficiency Centre of Jožef Stefan Institute) 
 
Sector  Scenario with  Scenarios with  Difference as per 
existing measures  ambitious  the scenario with 
2021–2050  additional  existing measures 
(million EUR)  measures 2021–  (million EUR) 
  2050 (million EUR)   
1 9,897  10,273  376 
Households  
1  3,363  3,932  569 
Services (public and 
2  
private sector)  
3 2,232  5,711  3,478 
Industry  
 
Transmission of  1,120  1,290  170 
4
electricity  
Distribution of  10,819  13,605  2,786 
4
electricity  
Central supply5  1,471  from 3,746 to 8,9566  from 2,276 to 7,4866 
7 632  6,149  5,517 
Local supply  
8 15,508  21,686  6,178 
Transport  
Total  45,041  from 66,391 to  from 21,349 to 
71,6016  26,5596 
 
 
NOTES TO THE TABLE: 
1
Investments  in  building  renovation  and  systems  for  heating  and  sanitary  hot  water 
preparation. 
2 
In the service sector, the public sector represents approximately 40 per cent and the 
private sector about 60 per cent of the entire scope of investments. 
3Investments in new technologies, procedural improvements and transition to a circular 
economy with an emphasis on efficient energy use and inclusion of RES. 
4 
Investments in the renovation of the transmission and distribution network for energy 
transmission and storage. The table consists of investment costs and also includes the costs 
of meeting the needs for flexibility and partly for systemic services. Overall costs, including 
the costs of operating and maintaining the energy system, are discussed in expert bases. 
Various financing models (chapter 8.2) also impact the organisation and arrangement of the 
investments defined by sectors. 
5Investments in new energy generation facilities in the transmission network (the energy 
sector only). 
6Scope of investments for two scenarios with additional measures: WAM SNG and WAM NU. 
7Investments in new devices within the local supply sector (solar power plants, wind farms, 
etc.). 
8 
Investments for the development of efficient public transport, modernisation and construction 
of railway hubs and high speed lines, cycling networks, etc. 
 
 
The scenario with ambitious additional measures (WAM) includes EUR 21 to 27 billion more 
investments than the scenario with the existing measures (Table 3). The amount EUR 21 
billion refers to the WAM SNG scenario, and EUR 27 billion to the WAM NU scenario. It is 
evident from the table that a total of between EUR 66 to 71 billion of investments must be 
governed for the attainment of climate objectives in the 2021–2050 period, whereby only 
  77 investments in energy efficiency and low-carbon energy sources are included in the field of 
buildings. If observing the entire scope of investments for new construction (the sector of 
households and services), the total investment that must be steered increases by more than 
EUR 23 billion (which is a total of EUR 90 billion in the SNG scenario or EUR 95 billion in the 
NU scenario). 
 
A significant renovation of the entire system is before the transport sector, which anticipates 
EUR  6.5  billion  of  investments  for  the  ambitious  scenario  (investments  in  sustainable 
mobility, rail and road transport) (source: NECP). The foregoing denotes almost EUR 1 billion 
more than in the scenario with the existing measures. The scope of investments for this field 
in  accordance  with  the  ambitious  scenario  is  estimated  to  be  EUR  22  billion  by  2050 
(additionally in comparison to the existing scenario – somewhat more than EUR 6 billion). A 
suitable infrastructure and support environment are pivotal for the transition to sustainable 
forms of transport. 
 
 
8.2  Green financing for the transition to a low-carbon society 
 
The chapter discusses the entire financing model for the transition to a low-carbon society 
which, in addition to funding sources for climate measures, also includes measures of a 
financial nature for the transition promotion. An important part of the greening of public and 
private finances is also the prevention of financing activities that are harmful to climate 
objectives. 
 
 
8.2.1 Situation 
 
Today, Slovenia earmarks private and public funds for climate measures. Specifically, public 
funds  are  obtained  from  the  following  sources:  the  Special  Climate  Change  Fund; 
contribution for energy efficiency and electricity generation from high-efficiency cogeneration 
and from RES; funds from the EU structural and investment funds, especially the Cohesion 
Fund and the Rural Development Fund; sources from other EU programmes; budget sources 
for ensuring Slovenian participation in the implementation of the European cohesion policy, 
and sources for financing transport infrastructure development. In 2019, EUR 71 million 
worth  of  incentives  were  earmarked  for  subsidising  measures  which  contribute  to  the 
attainment of the national objective of reducing emissions; the major part was earmarked for 
measures  of  energy  renovation  of  buildings  and  fewer  incentives  were  earmarked  for 
industry. 
 
Slovenia promotes the reduction of GHG emissions with two key measures of green tax 
policy, i.e. environmental tax on air pollution with CO  emissions, which taxes fossil fuels 
2
regarding their carbon content, and the vehicle tax, the level of which also depends on CO  
2
emissions. Nevertheless, tax measures, which are contrary to the objectives of emission 
reduction, apply simultaneously in Slovenia. The reimbursement of excise duties on fossil 
fuels stands out the most with regard to the amount of funds. A project of green budgetary 
reform  was  also  carried  out  in  the  2017–2018  period,  which  was  completed  with  the 
publication of recommendations. 
  78 8.2.1.1 Guidelines and measures adopted until 2030 
 
The NECP defines further activities for greening the budget, while the SDS 2030 does not 
state its position on this issue. The NECP plans an increase in public financial resources for 
promoting and accelerating investments and the implementation of other measures to reduce 
the GHG emissions, particularly for: 
-  a comprehensive development of the electricity distribution networks; 
-  investments in the railway infrastructure and other forms of sustainable mobility; 
-  investments  in  research  and  development  in  order  to  increase  GDP  to  3  per  cent 
(involving investments) by 2030; 
-  implementation of EEU and RES measures in all sectors: comprehensive renovation of 
buildings, development of a circular economy, renovation and expansion of DH systems, 
generation of electricity and heat from RES, etc. 
 
The environmental tax on air pollution with CO  emissions will gradually increase to equalise 
2
its amount as soon as possible and then harmonise it with the price of emission allowances 
(at the level of at least 30 EUR/t of CO  by 2030). The reimbursements of excise duties on 
2
energy  products,  which  are  contrary  to  the  objectives  of  GHG  emission  reduction,  will 
gradually reduce: they will be abolished in transport by 2025 or as per the development of the 
EU legislation and in industry by 2030, or the reimbursements of excise duties  will be 
conditioned by the implementation of emission reduction measures (certificate obtained in 
accordance with standards ISO 50001 or ISO 14001, which contributes to an increase in 
energy and material efficiency, etc.). In compliance with the planned amendments to the EU 
legislation (within the EGD), the process of greening the national budget for the formation of 
harmonised and efficient solutions will continue in the field of taxes and duties in all sectors 
vital for the attainment of climate neutrality objectives. 
 
 
8.2.1.2 Starting points in the European Green Deal 
 
The legislative bases which are being drafted or prepared within the EGD that significantly 
affect the definition of financing in this Strategy, include: 
-  the Just Transition Mechanism proposed by the EC together with the Just Transition 
Fund, which will ensure a just and inclusive manner of transition and will steer towards 
the  formation  of  the  user-adjusted  and  practical  assistance  to  help  workers  with 
investments in the most affected regions due to the transition. Transition management 
will require significant structural changes to business models relating to the requirements 
on competence and relative prices; 
-  at least 30 per cent of resources from the InvestEU Fund will be earmarked for climate 
measures, and project sustainability will be examined as well (in the sense of economic, 
environmental  and  social  sustainability).  It  is  necessary  to  define  the  method  of 
cooperation between national banks when drafting instruments at the national level and 
the budgetary planning of measures; 
-  when drafting the sustainable financing strategy, the EC will observe Regulation (EU) 
2020/852  of the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  of  18  June  2020  on  the 
establishment  of  a  framework  to  facilitate  sustainable  investment,  and  amending 
Regulation (EU) 2019/2088 (OJ L 198, 22.6.2020, p. 13); 
-  inclusion of the sustainability aspect into the framework of company management and 
reporting to the investors about the attainment of all three aspects of sustainability. 
Special attention is dedicated to the list of criteria for technical screening; 
-  design  of  the  EU  green  bond  standard,  which  will  enable  the  implementation  of 
sustainable  investments  in  an  efficient  manner  which  determines  eligible  projects, 
manner of applying taxonomy at the project level, design of a framework for green 
bonds, manner of reporting and legislative requirements for disclosure and verification 
method at the EU level and outside of it; 
-  integration  of  climate  and  environmental  risks  in  the  financial  system  and  their 
  79 management  within  the  system  (inclusion  in  the  prudential  framework,  increase  in 
resilience  against  climate  and  environmental  risks,  especially  from  the  viewpoint  of 
financial risks). 
 
8.2.2 Vision 
 
Slovenia  will  steer  investments  and  consumption  (private  and  public)  towards  a  low-
carbon circular economy and the adaptation to climate change. The principles of climate 
justice  will  be  observed  accordingly:  the  costs  and  benefits  of  the  transition  will  be 
distributed fairly, and the most vulnerable groups of citizens will be enabled to implement 
measures to mitigate and adapt to climate changes. 
 
Climate measures also have multiple benefits because they contribute to the attainment of 
environmental,  social  and  economic  strategic objectives  pertaining  to  water  and  energy 
management,  food  security,  environmental  and  nature  protection,  protection  and 
conservation of cultural heritage, and other strategic sources. 
 
 
8.2.3 Objective by 2050 
 
To support climate policy, Slovenia will thoroughly reform public finances and, in doing so, 
will greatly depend on the EGD. Taxes and other leverage in the field of green priorities will 
be redirected in a way intended to steer public and private investment and consumption 
towards a low-carbon circular economy and adaptation to climate change. An important 
objective is to ensure the transition in a fair and inclusive manner. 
 
At the onset of the 2021–2027 period, Slovenia is providing resources (see sub-chapter on 
financing sources) for the implementation of measures. By 2023, a comprehensive system 
will be designed and a financing model for investments and other measures for the transition 
to a climate-neutral society by 2050 will be defined, whereby a support environment for the 
promotion of financing private and public investments and other measures for the transition 
to a low-carbon circular economy and the adaptation to climate change will be built and 
enhanced. 
 
 
8.2.4 Main orientations and fields of action by 2050 
 
Slovenia recognises the key role that financing has in the attainment of climate neutrality and 
adaptation to climate change. It will promote the transition to a low-carbon circular economy, 
whereby significant improvement of material efficiency, as the connecting element between 
the environmental and competitive objectives, will be crucial, too. 
 
As  stated  in  the  EGD,  the  reduction  of  GHG  emissions  will  require  extensive  public 
investment  and  enhanced  efforts for  private  capital  to  be  directed  towards  climate  and 
environmental action, while preventing attachment to unsustainable practices. To meet these 
ambitions,  the  majority  of  investments  in  public  and  private  sectors,  which  will  be 
implemented until 2050, will have to be guided. The scope of investments will be larger than 
the present ones; energy costs will be lower, especially for imported energy and that will 
release private resources for investment on a larger scale. 
 
In compliance with the EGD, Slovenia will strengthen the integration of the sustainability 
aspect  into  the  corporate  governance  framework  and  report  to  its  investors  on  the 
achievement of all three sustainability aspects. It will give priority to promoting the integration 
of climate risks in the management of financial companies. 
 
When managing the state and local communities, the progress criteria will, in addition to the 
  80 currently  established  economic  criteria,  also  include  the  assessment  of  social  and 
environmental wellbeing and risks, which will be exceptionally important for climate change 
management. 
 
8.2.4.1 Financing model 
 
By 2023, Slovenia will form a system and determine the financing model to implement 
investments for the transition to a climate-neutral society by 2050. The system will be based 
on a harmonised utilisation of non-refundable and refundable public funds and financing 
sources provided by financial institutions and funds. The system will be intended for the 
activation of private sources in low-carbon solution investments. The financial model will 
serve as the backbone of the investment promotion system and will incorporate a number of 
tax and legislative instruments and instruments for planning, information dissemination, etc., 
which  will  ensure  a  faster  transition  and  the  cost-  and  environmentally-efficient 
implementation of investments. 
 
The formation of the financing model will be harmonised between all stakeholders in order to 
generate an efficient financial support environment (formation of platforms necessary for a 
uniform assessment, project financing and knowledge concentration) and design project 
offices which will enable high-quality preparation (also aggregation of dispersed projects), 
project treatment and a high degree of combination of various funding sources. Slovenia will 
prepare the model in two phases: 
-  programming of the use of EU funds for ensuring a just transition by 2027 is underway, 
while  the  state  will  also  rely  on  earmarked  EU  funding  for  the  period  until  2027. 
Furthermore, Slovenia will also programme the application of national funds as listed in 
the sub-chapter on financing sources; 
-  by 2023, Slovenia will design, and by 2027, establish a comprehensive support system 
for the implementation of large and small investment and other projects for the transition 
to a low-carbon circular economy and society. The system will be designed harmoniously 
and  in  coordination  with  the  ministry  responsible  for  finance  for  the  entire  financial 
incentive sector. 
 
Within the system, Slovenia will enable the formation of funds through the implementation of 
public infrastructure investments for the transition to a low-carbon society. It is reasonable to 
participate in the financing of infrastructural investments of topical initiatives and packages of 
anti-crisis measures of the Recovery and Resilience Facility (RRF), the InvestEU, payment of 
a contribution to the European Guarantee Fund and use of the guarantee for infrastructure 
projects and elimination of COVID-19 consequences (if Slovenia fails to pay the funds to the 
European Guarantee Fund, it will provide them from the budget), and utilisation of sources 
from the Just Transition Fund (JTF) to form a fund for financing infrastructural investments in 
the Zasavje and Šalek regions. In the period after 2027 (next financial framework), the funds 
will be formed in harmonisation and coordination with the ministry responsible for finance for 
the entire financial incentive sector (entire incentive system of the Republic of Slovenia) with 
the utilisation of EU guarantees and other sources as listed in the sub-chapter on financing 
sources. To finance a sustainable transport infrastructure, Slovenia will examine and provide 
additional financing sources. 
 
When designing the financing model, the starting points are as follows: 
-  the funding is based on grants to finance public and private investment in a low-carbon 
and  circular  economy.  At  present,  a  sufficient  number  of  incentives  to  redirect 
investments exists, so a significant increase is not necessary. The earmarked funds 
collected represent about one sixth of the funds that will be needed in the future to carry 
out the anticipated scope of investments necessary for a successful transition to a 
climate-neutral society by 2050; 
-  private financial funds will be engaged to a greater extent (five sixths) to carry out the 
transition to a climate-neutral society by 2050; private sector investment opportunities 
  81 vary; 
-  the funding gap will be covered through the prioritised application of the EU funds 
available and financing through financial instruments which rely on EU sources. The 
planning and formation of financial instruments (refundable funds, guarantees, capital 
injections) will be based on cohesion funds and the utilisation of the EU budgetary 
resources (see also sub-chapter on financing sources); 
-  however,  the  development  of  financial  instruments  that  depend  merely  on  the  EU 
resources will not suffice for the steering and implementation of necessary investments. 
Slovenia  will  have  to  engage  additional  mechanisms  to  steer  private  resources  into 
investments by engaging additional budgetary resources for the redirection of investments 
and  for  the  development  of  instruments  through  the  implementation  of  financial 
engineering. The provision of additional budgetary resources will be necessary as a 
condition for co-financing projects from the programmes or EU funds, which is also a 
condition for drawing resources from the EU Just Transition Fund.  
 
8.2.4.1.1 Financing sources 
 
To promote climate measures, Slovenia will further earmark resources from the following 
own public funds: 
-  the Climate Change Fund; 
-  contribution for energy efficiency; 
-  contribution for electricity generation from high-efficiency cogeneration and from RES; 
-  resources marked for financing of transport infrastructure development. 
 
Until  2027,  at  least  30  per  cent  of  the  EU  long-term  budget  resources  and  the 
NextGenerationEU instrument will be earmarked for the promotion of climate measures. As 
per the EC’s guidelines, Slovenia will incorporate climate content in the programmes for use 
of these resources and will exploit the opportunities within the EU to finance the transition to 
a low-carbon society (hereinafter: LCS) to the greatest extent possible, which is an important 
element of recovery. It will be possible to promote certain measures from this Strategy and 
the NECP within the framework of EU funding intended for the development of digitalisation 
(20  per  cent  of  structural  funds  and  the  recovery  mechanism)  within  the  foregoing 
mechanisms. 
 
The key mechanisms within the EU are: 
-  the Recovery and Resilience Facility; 37 per cent of funds within this framework are 
intended for climate measures; 
-  structural and investment funds of the 2021–2027 multiannual financial framework (the 
Cohesion Fund, the Rural Development Fund, the European Regional Development 
Fund, the European Social Fund, the European Territorial Cooperation, etc.), in which at 
least 30 per cent of funds are earmarked for climate measures; 
-  the Just Transition Fund, in which the funds are also anticipated for the EGD measures; 
-  the InvestEU Fund for implementation of the EGD and the recovery plan; 
-  payment of a contribution to the European Guarantee Fund and use of the guarantee for 
infrastructure projects and elimination of COVID-19 consequences (note: if Slovenia fails 
to pay its contribution to this fund, it will provide resources from the budget); 
-  resources within the EU programmes (LIFE, H2020, etc.). 
 
In this field, it is possible to attract investment capital from the funds and other dedicated 
financing  resources  of  international  financial  institutions,  but  the  activation  of  private 
financing resources is of key importance. 
 
8.2.4.2 Reform of tax and budgetary policies 
 
Slovenia will plan its reform and the greening of tax and budgetary policies well. They will be 
designed to promote sustainable development and resilience to climate shocks, as well as to 
  82 enable a fairer transition and the state’s other development priorities, as this is very important 
for achieving climate goals at the lowest possible cost. Adjustment in the structure of taxes 
will not only be necessary for the attainment of environmental, but also of fiscal, objectives 
because of the change in the use of energy products and other changes related to the 
transition to a low-carbon society. When drafting measures, Slovenia will try to realise the 
long-term competitiveness objectives of the business sector. When planning and reforming 
the  budgetary  and  tax  policies,  Slovenia  will  apply  suitable  tax  solutions  to  provide 
appropriate incentives for the sustainable conduct of producers, users and consumers. The 
tax policy will support the climate policy and a fair transition. It will use tax measures to 
discourage GHG emissions and direct tax measures to stimulate action to increase climate 
resilience.  The  social  and  development  aspects  will  be  observed,  too.  Fiscal  and 
environmental objectives and the social and development components will also be discussed 
and considered accordingly. In doing so, the decisions already made in Slovenia will be 
taken into consideration, and measures adopted at the EU level will support the policy 
reformation. Slovenia will: 
-  gradually  reduce  reimbursements  of  excise  duties  on  liquid  fossil  fuels  (complete 
abolishment by 2030 or in accordance with EU legislation), as already stipulated by the 
NECP; 
-  increase the environmental tax on air pollution with CO  emissions and harmonise it with 
2
the price of emission allowances or marginal costs to attain the objectives of the Paris 
Agreement, as already stipulated by the NECP; 
-  promote climate action with other tax measures, i.e. tax relief, different tax rates, etc.; 
-  take environmental factors and risks into account in annual budgets and medium-term 
fiscal plans; 
-  participate in the formation of an efficient measure at the EU level, i.e. a carbon border 
adjustment mechanism for selected sectors to reduce the risk of relocating CO  sources 
2
and enable the competitiveness of low-carbon production; 
-  direct the resources of the European structural and investment funds and other EU 
sources in Slovenia to support sustainable development to the greatest extent possible; 
-  condition state aid for the business sector with the criteria of a low-carbon transition, 
promote  the  activation  of  private  capital  when  financing  projects  and  attaining  the 
objectives set in the NECP and this Strategy; 
-  upgrade the system of green public procurement (several criteria related to the reduction 
of GHG emissions, more categories of products in the green public procurement system) 
and greatly increase the proportion of green public procurements until 2030 and by 100 
per cent until 2040. 
 
The fiscal policy will not suffice, but it will represent one of the support pillars for the new 
financing model. It will also be accompanied by package target instruments (legislative, 
information, etc.). 
 
8.2.4.3 Ensuring a just transition 
 
The EGD states: "The transition can only succeed if it is conducted in a fair and inclusive 
way. The most vulnerable are the most exposed to the harmful effects of climate change and 
environmental degradation. At the same time, managing the transition will lead to significant 
structural changes in business models, skill requirements and relative prices. The public, 
depending on their social and geographic circumstances, will be affected in different ways. 
Not all Member States, regions and cities start the transition from the same point or have the 
same capacity to respond. These challenges require a strong policy response at all levels." 
 
Within the framework of climate policy, Slovenia will ensure that: 
-  the costs of benefits of the transition are divided fairly; 
-  no one will be overlooked in the transition to a low-carbon society; 
-  the most vulnerable groups of the population will be enabled to implement measures for 
mitigation of, and adaptation to, climate change; 
  83 -  the  entities  affected  the  most  by  the  transition  will  receive  prompt  assistance  for 
necessary action. 
 
To ensure a just transition, it will be very important to draft and implement other policies which 
contribute to the reduction of inequality in society. 
 
In accordance with the EGD, Slovenia will steer support in the regions affected most by the 
transition towards restructuring into a low-carbon economy and low-carbon activities, which 
will be resilient to climate change and will enable a generation of new and stable jobs with 
higher added value. To this end, it will prepare regional plans for a fair transition for the two 
regions that will be affected the most by the loss of jobs in production and the use of fossil 
fuels,  and  possibly  for  another  three  regions  due  to  the  needs  for  a  transformation  of 
production processes in industrial facilities with the highest GHG intensity. Grants of the Just 
Transition Fund represent one of the pillars of the mechanism for a just transition; the 
drawing conditions will be determined in the proposal for a Regulation of the European 
Parliament and of the Council establishing the Just Transition Fund (COM/2020/22). 
 
Slovenia will prepare and support job transition strategies for other activities. 
 
Slovenia will ensure that the most vulnerable groups of the population are able to carry out 
measures for the transition to LCS and, in particular, that the measures do not worsen the 
financial situation of citizens in the first and second income quintile groups. The measures 
(e.g.  increase  in  the  amount  of  CO   tax  for  fossil  fuels),  which  would  affect  the  most 
2
vulnerable groups will be compensated for these groups with suitable mechanisms (e.g. 
options to apply tax revenue to reduce the rate of social security contributions, increase in 
household social benefits, targeted measures of EEU and RES for the prevention of energy 
poverty). As per the adopted measures and acts (Energy Act (Official Gazette of the Republic 
of Slovenia [Uradni list RS], Nos. 60/19 – official consolidated text, 65/20 and 158/20 – 
ZURE;  hereinafter:  EZ-1)  and  the  NECP),  Slovenia  will  implement  the  measures  for 
mitigation and reduction of energy poverty within social and housing policies and the targeted 
measures of EEU and RES. Measures to adapt to climate change will be designed within the 
framework of the housing policy and will be amended, if necessary, with targeted measures 
for the most vulnerable groups upon the reform of the national housing programme and when 
reviewing the NECP. Slovenia will draft measures to prevent mobility poverty resulting from 
higher personal transport costs (more expensive vehicles) within the new transport strategy 
and  the  spatial  development  strategy,  whereby  the  measures  of  harmonious  regional 
development, digitalisation of services and public passenger transport will be crucial. The 
measures will also be carried out at the local level, and energy and mobility poverty will be 
discussed in local community plans as well. (Also see chapter 11.) 
 
 
8.2.4.4 Providing green financing of investments and other measures 
 
To meet these ambitions, the majority of investments in public and private sectors, which will 
be implemented until 2050, will have to be steered. The scope of investments will be larger 
than at present; energy costs will be lower, especially for imported energy and that will 
release resources for investments of a larger scale. In particular, the investors face the 
following obstacles: high initial investment costs and the ability to finance and manage risks 
related to the transition to LCS. Incentives will focus on the overcoming of these barriers: 
provision  of  funds  with  the  offer  of  financial  instruments.  Financial  incentives  will  be 
proportionate to the effects on the reduction of GHG emissions and other public benefits for 
sectors  (strategic  reliability,  food  security,  cultural  heritage  conservation,  etc.),  the 
environment  (flood  safety,  etc.)  and  other  benefits  of  multi-purpose  measures.  Major 
incentives will be intended for development solutions and when entering markets. 
 
Buildings. It is assessed that 60 per cent of households can implement a comprehensive 
  84 energy-saving  building  renovation  with  their  own  sources  and  borrowing  (Cirman  et  al. 
Analiza  dejavnikov,  povezanih  s  finančnimi  sposobnostmi  gospodinjstev,  ki  vplivajo  na 
odločanje  o  investicijah  za  učinkovito  rabo  energije,  poročilo  v  okviru  projekta  LIFE 
Podnebna pot 2050 (Analysis of factors related to households’ financial abilities affecting 
decision-making  regarding  investments  for  efficient  energy  use,  Report  within  the  LIFE 
Climate Path 2050 project, 2018). Incentives for the groups that are unable to implement 
renovation on their own will be prepared (e.g. guarantee scheme, energy contracting and 
"payment incorporated in electricity bills"). Furthermore, it was estimated that the welfare of 
citizens of the first and second quintile groups worsens in the scenarios of the transition to a 
low-carbon society. As a result, measures for these groups of citizens will be enhanced: in 
addition to other measures of general social policy (see chapter 11), incentives for the energy 
renovation of buildings and other measures of efficient energy use will be reinforced to 
encourage investment for the most vulnerable groups of citizens. 
The objectives of the transition to a low-carbon circular economy will be attained by enforcing 
sustainable  construction  and  renovation  of  buildings.  In  addition  to  energy  efficiency, 
construction  or  renovations  will  be  based  on  materials  with  a  low  carbon  footprint. 
Renovation will also include other measures designed to improve the condition of buildings 
(seismic  and  fire  safety,  resilience  against  climate  risks,  etc.;  the  so-called  broader 
renovation).  Simultaneous  energy  and  broader  renovation  is  an  important  element  of  a 
circular  economy,  with  significant  effects  on  material  efficiency  and  subsequent  GHG 
emissions during the lifespan of a building. Special emphasis will be put on the construction 
of wooden buildings. A financing model of sustainable and broader renovation for multi-
dwelling buildings in Slovenia, which are at highest seismic risk, will be established. Slovenia 
will thus define additional dedicated financial resources within the housing policy. For efficient 
implementation, the competencies and tasks of the institutions will be defined in more detail 
and will be enhanced if necessary (e.g. housing funds, the Eco Fund, the SID Bank).Slovenia 
will ensure additional dedicated financial resources for special groups of buildings, whereby a 
particular priority will focus on steering financial resources for broader renovations of cultural 
heritage buildings. 
 
Transport. In the field of transport, the priority focus of measures will be on a sustainable 
transport infrastructure with an emphasis on railway infrastructure, public transport and active 
mobility. Infrastructural projects in transport are typically large-scale projects which require a 
longer  and  stable  financing  period.  Stable  systemic  resources  for  financing  transport 
measures  are  vital  because  they  enable  players  at  the  state  and  municipal  level  to 
realistically  plan  and  implement  measures.  As  stated  in  chapter  8.2.4.1,  Slovenia  will 
establish a comprehensive support system and will form funds for the implementation of 
large infrastructural investments. It will also enhance the financing of sustainable mobility 
measures from the Climate Change Fund and the European funds from the Multiannual 
Financial  Framework,  particularly  the  Cohesion  Fund  and  the  Recovery  and  Resilience 
Facility. It will also consistently direct all investments for transport infrastructure development 
and resources earmarked for this purpose in compliance with the objectives for the reduction 
of GHG emissions. Systemically stable, long-term and predictable financial resources will 
thus  be  established  and  ensured  for  measures  with  clearly  set  objectives  of  emission 
reduction,  the  promotion  of  sustainable  transport  infrastructure  development  in  the 
jurisdiction of municipalities (public passenger transport, offer of new services, non-motorised 
forms of transport, the park-and-ride system, promotion of charging infrastructure for e-
mobility  and  other  alternative  sources,  etc.)  and  the  state  (rail  transport,  etc.).  The 
development of transport hubs, new logistics approaches and the circularity principle in 
logistics, including digitalisation and other measures for reducing GHG emissions in transport 
and mobility, will be promoted (see also chapter 6.3). 
 
Industry. Industry will deal with high prices of emission allowances and energy products. 
Prices will be mainly influenced by European markets and not so much by the supply and 
demand for low-carbon resources in the country. The industry will require support with the 
transition to a low-carbon circular economy to prevent stranded investments and focus on 
  85 green investments (energy efficiency, material efficiency, RES, etc.).The decarbonisation of 
energy-intensive activities or the transition to the use of materials or products which do not 
require energy-intensive production will be particularly challenging. At the same time, these 
industries are materially intensive, so it is necessary to enhance the use of secondary raw 
materials and introduce other circular economy concepts. Slovenia will promote industrial 
modernisation, especially research and development and the application of the latest high-
tech  solutions.  It  will  carry  out  measures  to  ensure  the  competitiveness  of  low-carbon 
production and co-design measures at the EU level (e.g. mechanism for carbon border 
adjustment,  product-service  development  for  a  circular  economy).  In  the  long-term,  the 
modernisation will focus on the management of price and other expected risks. Slovenia will 
enable a gradual transition within the framework of the EU policy. 
 
In the transition to a low-carbon circular economy, it will be crucial to introduce sustainable 
business models to expand the offer of products in addition to the offer of services related to 
relevant products and thus enhance the added value and competitiveness in these activities. 
Special emphasis will be put on the promotion of new investments in the wood industry. The 
support environment will be compliant with the EGD starting points and incorporated in 
Slovenia’s new industrial strategy by 2030 and the comprehensive strategic decarbonisation 
project for the transition to a circular economy, which is being drafted in cooperation with the 
European Institute of Innovation and Technology and the Joint Research Centre of the 
European Commission. The renewed Smart Specialisation Strategy will play a crucial role 
within this framework. 
 
Energy. Major challenges will be the financing of electricity supply development and the 
implementation of large-scale investments; in the period leading to 2030, financial resources 
will be needed in particular for the development of electricity distribution and transmission 
networks, the provision of flexibility, systemic services and energy production from RES. 
Financing of the network development is for the most part anticipated from the network 
charge  or  a  special  contribution,  i.e.  by  observing  the  polluter-  or  user-pays  principle. 
European funds for mitigation of climate change and digitalisation will also be available in this 
area. The flexibility  services  will  generate  additional  revenue. The formation  of  network 
charges  must  observe  the  future  development  of  the  energy  market  (particularly  the 
dispersion of production, energy storage facilities and implementation of demand response 
services). 
 
Major  investments  in  competitive  and  dispersed  electricity  generation  from  RES  are 
anticipated in accordance with the guidelines outlined in previous chapters. Investments must 
be steered in such a way that simultaneous growth of employment in the sectors of green 
low-carbon  technologies  and  services  is  ensured  and  that  the  state’s  other  strategic 
environmental and economic objectives are met. 
 
In the period until 2050, presumably in the 2035–2045 period, electricity generation from the 
majority of current facilities will have to be substituted, with the exception of hydroelectric 
power  plants.  Based  on  expert,  high-quality  and  independent  analyses  of  economic, 
environmental, spatial, social and economic feasibility, it is necessary to assess methods for 
substituting these sources to facilitate decision-making. All legal aspects of the necessary 
administrative procedures (national spatial plans, licensing, etc.) must be examined minutely 
and drafted accordingly. Timely investments in the development of new environmentally 
acceptable energy locations and preservation of the existing ones are also envisaged. 
 
Within the framework of increasing network charges (and expected higher electricity prices), 
special attention will be paid to vulnerable groups of consumers (energy poverty) for which 
targeted measures for reducing energy costs will be available (see chapter 8.2.4.3). 
 
 
 
  86 8.2.5 Climate change adaptation 
 
Slovenia  has  available  adaptation  funds  (the  Climate  Change  Fund,  the  European 
Agricultural Fund for Rural Development, and the European structural and investment funds 
(CF, ERDF), which for now exceed the demand. Investments relating to the adaptation have 
not been assessed because possible action scenarios for this field have not yet been drafted 
(see also chapter 5). Judging from the experience of countries which are better prepared for 
climate change, we expect that additional funds will be required. Many measures will be 
implemented by the municipalities themselves or in cooperation with the institutions at the 
state level (e.g. in the field of flood safety, the majority of measures is undertaken by the 
Slovenian  Water  Agency,  while  many  measures  are  or  will  be  carried  out  by  the 
municipalities in cooperation with the Agency). Necessary expert bases, instructions and 
training must be ensured beforehand for the projects to be of sufficient quality. 
 
For better cost efficiency, Slovenia will prioritise the implementation preparation of preventive 
measures  (e.g.  activities  outside  flood  risk  areas).  An  action  plan  and  investment 
programmes (see  chapter  5)  will  be  drafted for  other measures.  Until  2023,  necessary 
methodologies  for  assessing  the  climate  risk  of  projects  and  their  resilience  to  climate 
change  will  be  established  and  incorporated  in  the  criteria  for  financing,  guarantees, 
insurances, issue of permits, etc. 
 
For  the  adaptation  to  climate  change  with  sustainable  solutions,  Slovenia  will  primarily 
ensure financial resources for the investments which have the largest potential for carbon 
capture and storage and those which will ensure the improvement of natural habitats and the 
implementation of sustainable solutions. 
 
National multi-purpose strategic projects for attaining strategic objectives in the supply of 
water,  food  and  electricity  will  also  be  of  key  importance  because  their  synergies  will 
contribute greatly to the cost efficiency of attaining the objectives. 
 
 
8.2.6 Consumption patterns 
 
Slovenia will define responsible institutions for promoting changes in consumption patterns. 
For the most part, measures in this field will be new and are yet to be developed, resulting in 
few or as yet unestablished incentives for such measures. Most measures refer to the 
generation of markets, supply and demand promotion, accessibility of the green products 
offer and also the promotion of reuse and sharing (libraries of things, financing of e.g. 
"recharge" machines) and other new consumption patterns. A number of measures involving 
mobility are also included in this framework (calculation of travel costs) and other measures 
(e-services, e-state, etc.) for lesser mobility needs (lower transport or travel costs for the 
same service accessibility, etc.).A set of instruments (green public procurement, taxation of 
resource use, financial incentives, product labelling, which will be prepared at the EU level, 
etc.) will be drafted. 
 
 
8.2.7 Efficiency of resource usage, governance and management 
 
Slovenia  will  concentrate  knowledge  and  human  resources  capacity  for  the  efficient 
management of public resources to promote the transition to a low-carbon circular economy 
and adaptation to climate change. At present, the incentives are dispersed in more than four 
institutions. The resource management of the Climate Change Fund will be upgraded. 
 
 
 
 
  87 8.2.8 Financial reporting 
 
Also see the chapter on implementation monitoring. At the annual level, Slovenia will draft 
the climate finance report, which will include: 
-  resources for incentives (total and by sources, by IPCC sectors, by line ministries and by 
groups of measures) and their effect – realisation and comparison with plans (all missing 
financing plans will be drafted beforehand); 
-  promoted investments and activities (jobs) – total and by IPCC sectors, by sectors in 
accordance with emissions responsibility, and by groups of measures); 
-  general government revenue arising from environmental taxes. 
 
 
8.2.9 Proposed indicators 
 
-  Total funds for incentives; 
-  specific cost of GHG emissions reduction per incentive unit; 
-  leverage. 
 
8.3 Policies and measures for research, development and innovations 
 
In  the  scope  of  "research,  innovations  and  competitiveness",  the  NECP  anticipates  an 
increase in investments for research and development, i.e. at least 3 per cent of GDP by 
2030 (of which at least 1 per cent of GDP will be derived from public resources), more 
investments in the development of human resources and new knowledge for the transition to 
a climate-neutral society, support to companies for a competitive and efficient transition, 
promotion of targeted research projects and multidisciplinary development and research 
programmes and demonstration projects; the climate objectives must also be observed by 
the Research and Innovation Strategy of Slovenia (RISS), steering of companies towards 
financing and participation in development and research projects with an active tax policy, 
promotion of new, and enhancement of the already existing, development and research 
programmes compliant with the NECP objectives. The NECP also promotes the application 
of digitalisation in climate measures and an enhancement of cybersecurity in all strategic 
systems, research and development activities between the public and private sectors, and 
the  establishment  of  competitive  conditions  for  innovative  research  work  in  public 
undertakings. 
 
 
8.3.1 Objective and orientations by 2050 
 
Numerous innovations (social and technological) will be necessary for the transition to a 
climate-neutral society, which Slovenia will support and promote. Slovenia will also further 
encourage and enforce the NECP orientations. It will increase resources for research and 
development, i.e. the proportion of funds will amount to at least 4 per cent of GDP (of which 
at least 2 per cent will be derived from public resources). Research and innovation are vital 
for a successful transition to a climate-neutral society. Due to its small size, Slovenia cannot 
carry out all the necessary innovations and research on its own and will thus strive for the 
active participation of Slovenian development and research institutions and the business 
sector in international research and projects and will simultaneously attempt to stop the brain 
or knowledge drain abroad. Slovenia will continue to promote interdisciplinary studies and 
projects and will further earmark funds more intensively in applied projects (technological and 
social) and eco-innovations which will ensure the transition to a climate-neutral society and 
the utmost efficiency of these innovations. This field will be determined as one of the priority 
areas of application of research, development and innovations in Slovenia. 
 
Slovenia will be further actively involved in European initiatives promoting innovations for a 
low-carbon society, and in RES technologies and other fields. Furthermore, it will accelerate 
  88 research, development and innovations in promising (but commercially not yet economical) 
projects such as RES and other low-carbon technologies. 
 
A lack of social science analyses and research is noted in Slovenia regarding the transition to 
climate neutrality; without such knowledge, a challenging social transition is not possible. In 
cooperation  with  the  ministry  responsible  for  the  environment  and  climate  change,  the 
ministry responsible for research will prepare an analysis of required social science research 
in the shortest time possible or until the update of the NECP and determine priority fields or 
topics. Such research is necessary for the consolidation of a social agreement. 
 
Research, development and innovation are a horizontal component of all sectors mentioned 
in previous chapters. Further provision of connectivity between research, development and 
innovation  work  will  be  crucial,  including  a  connection  with  the  business  sector  and 
education. 
 
Slovenia will also provide resources for the development of necessary climate models for 
studying and monitoring climate change and its subsequent effects and for the formation of 
climate policies. 
 
 
9  IMPLEMENTATION ORGANISATION 
 
9.1  National level, inter-ministerial coordination 
 
For an efficient, successful and coordinated implementation of Slovenia’s long-term climate 
policy, the state and public administration must be governed and organised accordingly. 
They must also be competent to undertake the successful and efficient implementation of 
such a large, overarching and long-term project. 
Organisation of the state and public administration will logically observe the organisation at 
the EU level and good practices in this field in other EU member states. 
 
Efficient, successful and coordinated implementation of a long-term climate policy primarily 
necessitates the establishment of a body under the direct authority of the Government which 
will be responsible for climate policy coordination or Slovenia’s climate agreement. This also 
includes superiority over the sectors for coordination of climate policy, strategies and other 
documents, measures and content of Slovenia’s climate agreement. Based on the Climate 
Strategy, climate policy and all other relevant policies and Slovenian and EU policies, the 
authority will, together with all other competent sectors,  coordinate the preparation of a 
suitable plan for Slovenia’s climate agreement (hereinafter: SCA), which will be drafted after 
the adoption of the Climate Strategy. The green financial plan for implementing the climate 
agreement will also be an important element of SCA. The established authority’s expert team 
will have sufficient members and expertise to draft and efficiently coordinate at a high level all 
relevant sectors and necessary joint works, tasks and drafts of documents, measures and 
decisions of the Government of the Republic of Slovenia to implement, monitor and report on 
the results of the Slovenian climate policy and SCA. 
 
An independent scientific expert council will also be established to support the Government 
when monitoring and forming climate policies. 
 
The anticipated organisation will serve Slovenia to establish an appropriate stable structure 
at the highest level to manage the climate agreement and implement tasks in the field of 
climate  change.  A  stable  structure  and  organisation  also  enable  an  early  inclusion  of 
stakeholders and the broader interested and expert public in the preparation of policies, 
planning and implementation of measures in this field. The section of the newly established 
authority which will be involved in EIA and CEIA procedures relating to the adaptation, 
mitigation and monitoring of sectoral policies will also be enhanced. 
  89 9.2  Local policies and fields of action 
 
To enhance resilience to climate change and the transition to a climate-neutral society, one 
of  the  key  roles  will  be  played  by  local  communities  or  municipalities;  there  are  212 
municipalities in Slovenia. Municipalities carry out numerous tasks with regard to spatial 
planning, economic development, public utility services (local energy, waste collection, public 
transport,  etc.),  transport  planning  and  management,  management  of  public  buildings, 
concern for the environment, nature conservation, cultural heritage protection, etc. Slovenia 
does not have an official regional division, but the municipalities are already working together 
for the needs of various projects and other purposes. Many Slovenian municipalities joined 
various initiatives to reduce GHG emissions at the municipal or even regional level, and 
various municipal projects are also being implemented in the field of adaptation to climate 
change. In some areas, the municipalities are one step ahead of the state when it comes to 
implementing measures. 
 
At the local and regional levels, climate measures are quickly visible. Slovenia will thus 
enhance good and inclusive planning of measures at the local level as this enables an 
integration of climate objectives in various sectoral targets, while providing new jobs and new 
innovative solutions. A comprehensive regional transition is necessary; from climate, social 
and economic measures which result in the economic and social benefits of the transition. 
 
Due to the lack of regional division, Slovenia will plan climate change orientations at the level 
of  the  so-called  functional  regions  because  municipalities  are  frequently  too  small  for 
planning or forming certain measures (e.g. sustainable transport planning, which exceeds 
municipal borders) and they also experience insufficient human resources and knowledge. 
For the needs of planning or implementing local climate measures, the state will enable 
municipalities access to all public data (studies, bases) collected in one place. 
 
Slovenia  will  promote  energy  efficiency,  self-sufficiency  in  consumption  and  electricity 
generation from RES at the local level, exploitation of alternative energy sources, energy 
storage  and  development  of  digital  energy  platforms  or  technology  systems  and  digital 
platforms for the development of smart energy systems. 
 
Slovenia  will  also  promote  the  application  of digitalisation  at  the  local  level  (e.g. fewer 
meetings  in  person  in  town  centres,  which  will  reduce  transport  or  mobility  needs). 
Implementation of innovative solutions and digital technologies will also be promoted with 
regard  to  smart  cities  and  communities  (e.g.  sustainable  construction  in  towns  and 
communities in connection with the promotion of entrepreneurship and the circular economy 
(BIM), energy renovation of buildings, energy self-sufficiency of towns and communities, 
digitalisation  of  public  lighting  with  smart  light  management  and  light  allocation  and 
sustainable materials, construction of new, and expansion of the already existing, district 
heating and cooling networks, which primarily rely on RES). At the local level, high-tech 
digital solutions for adaptation to climate change, risk prevention and disaster resilience 
enhancement will be promoted. 
 
Slovenia will stablish support points for the transition to a climate-neutral society at regional 
and local levels. These will use human resources and knowledge of the already existing 
institutions (e.g. regional energy agencies, regional development agencies) or local energy 
groups. They will be intended for drafting projects, documentation, consulting, sharing of 
good practice examples, raising awareness, etc. At the local level, Slovenia will promote 
education, training and dissemination of information about the transition to a low-carbon 
society. The circular economy will be systemically promoted through smart and circular 
communities. 
 
Following the adoption of this Strategy, the ministry responsible for the environment will 
produce a brief handbook for local communities which will include main orientations and 
  90 fields of action for municipalities on the basis of which they will be able to prepare local 
strategies and plans. The handbook will be amended and updated in accordance with new 
findings and guidelines. 
 
 
9.3  Monitoring plan of climate policy implementation 
 
This chapter discusses the monitoring system of climate policy implementation and is not 
limited to monitoring the implementation of this Strategy. 
 
Slovenia will establish monitoring as a compulsory element in climate policy implementation. 
The monitoring will serve two purposes: 
-  a process of ongoing improvements (plan–do–check–act) will be established which will 
enable the adjustment of measures to changed circumstances and their upgrade if 
necessary, resulting in a more efficient realisation of the objectives set; 
-  monitoring will ensure the provision of data on the effects of implementing measures on 
the reduction of GHG emissions, which is needed for various reporting purposes at the 
national, European and global levels. 
 
Within  the  framework  of  monitoring,  various  indicators  will  be  used  for  assessing  the 
attainment of objectives and the effects of implementing climate policy. The indicators will be 
defined  by  individual  sectors  and  will  be  upgraded  and  supplemented  accordingly  with 
additional indicators if necessary. The indicators will be allocated a defined target value. Key 
indicators for monitoring the implementation of climate policy include: 
-  annual GHG emissions (kt of CO  equivalent) used for monitoring the attainment of the 
2
national objective regarding the reduction of GHG emissions by 2030; 
-  monitoring of sinks and emissions in the ETS sector (emissions outside the national 
objective); 
-  amount of financial resources (EUR) earmarked for the implementation of measures to 
reduce GHG emissions and the reduction in CO  emissions (kt of CO ) thus attained, to 
2 2
be used for monitoring the efficiency of financial resources usage; 
-  key  sectoral  indicators  IPCC  for  sectors  mitigating  climate  change:  energy  supply 
(transformation), transport, broader use (buildings, other sectors), industry, agriculture, 
LULUCF and for adaptation. 
 
9.3.1 Monitoring system of climate policy implementation 
 
The monitoring system of climate policy implementation will be established by an authority 
responsible  for  climate  change  in  cooperation  with  the  authority  responsible  for 
implementation of the comprehensive national energy and climate plan (NECP) and other 
line ministries by means of a suitable act, which will define their organisation and content in 
more detail. The system will be incorporated accordingly in the organisational structure for 
implementing climate policy. Its purpose will not only include monitoring the attainment of 
objectives from this Strategy, but also monitoring the implementation of climate change as 
defined in the NECP and other relevant documents. The monitoring system will: 
-  build on the current experience and content of monitoring the implementation of climate 
measures. The Climate Mirror will present the basis for monitoring the implementation of 
climate,  energy  and  other  measures  for  the  low-carbon  and  energy  efficiency 
arrangements; 
-  be upgraded accordingly for an overall monitoring of implementation of the NECP and 
other relevant documents in all their aspects; 
-  introduce monitoring as a process of ongoing improvements and will integrate monitoring 
in the management or governance of climate policy; 
-  ensure provision of the data necessary for reporting at the national and international 
levels. 
Within the monitoring system, it will be possible to incorporate all significant stakeholders in 
  91 the processes of improvement and upgrade of climate measures as a section of the process 
of ongoing improvements. Ministries, the Government Office for Development and European 
Cohesion Policy, the Eco Fund, etc. are responsible for implementing individual measures at 
the national level, while other authorities include representatives of the expert public, NGOs, 
etc. 
 
9.3.2 Reporting about climate policy implementation 
 
Reporting on the climate policy implementation and the attainment of objectives will take 
place at the national and international levels and will be the responsibility of the authority in 
charge of climate change. The authority competent for climate change will ensure timely and 
qualitative reporting, which is a significant part of joint global efforts for a long-term reduction 
of GHG emissions. 
 
Together with the authority responsible for energy (the NECP holder) and at the national 
level,  the  authority  responsible  for  climate  change  will  annually  draft  a  report  on  the 
implementation of measures for reducing GHG emissions and attaining the climate policy 
objectives by individual sectors as part of monitoring the NECP implementation. The report’s 
content and deadlines for its preparation will be defined in more detail in the act establishing 
the monitoring system for the implementation of climate and energy policies. For the field of 
GHG reduction, the report will include at least the assessment of attaining joint and sectoral 
objectives, the analysis of implementing measures with the help of indicators, review of 
instrument implementation, recommendations for improving the implementation of existing 
measures  or  the  introduction  of  new  ones,  including  the  updated  projections  of  GHG 
emissions at least biennially. 
 
Participation of the public is possible while the report is being drafted. The National Assembly 
is informed about the adopted annual report. The adopted annual report is made public. 
At the international level, Slovenia is obliged to report to the EC and the United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The obligations towards the EC 
currently arise from Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism for monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas 
emissions and for reporting other information at the national and Union level relevant to 
climate change and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC (hereinafter: Regulation (EU) No 
525/2013).As of and including 2021, member states are obliged to report as per Regulation 
(EU) 2018/1999, which has a reporting format that is almost identical to that of Regulation 
(EU) No 525/2013.In accordance with Regulation (EU) No 525/2013, Slovenia is obliged to 
establish  a  system  for  reporting  measures,  orientations  and  projections  which  includes 
institutional, legislative and procedural arrangements. Slovenia has not yet done so, as a 
contract is concluded for each new reporting. It is mandatory to arrange the foregoing as 
soon as possible for high-quality reporting. Deadlines within which Slovenia is obliged to 
report to the EC are: 
-  emission records: first version of records (15 January) and final version of records (15 
March) for the year preceding the previous year and assessment of records for the 
previous year (31 July); 
-  report on measures and emission projections: by 15 March every odd-numbered year. 
 
Obligations towards the UNFCCC Secretariat derive from the Convention itself. Deadlines by 
which Slovenia is obliged to report to the Secretariat are: 
-  emission records: final version of records for the year preceding the previous year (15 
April); this report must also consist of data requested within the framework of Article 7 of 
the Kyoto Protocol; 
-  national report on the implementation of commitments from the Convention and the 
Kyoto Protocol by the end of every fourth odd-numbered year and a biennial report on 
quantitative objectives and measures for attaining the objectives and on projections by 
the end of every second odd-numbered year. Reporting will be gradually harmonised 
  92 with the Paris Agreement and its content will closely resemble the existing biennial 
reports. 
 
 
10  INTERNATIONAL OUTLOOK 
 
10.1  EU 
 
The European Union, of which Slovenia is a member, is striving to become the first climate-
neutral continent, and also the leading continent in the fight against climate change at the 
global level by providing an example and assuming responsibility. To this end, the European 
Council endorsed the objective of making the EU climate-neutral by 2050 in December 2019 
(Decision of the European Council of 12 December 2019). 
 
The vision for a socially just and cost-efficient attainment of net zero GHG emission levels in 
the EU was presented by the EC in November 2018 in a communication entitled "A clean 
planet for all: a European strategic long-term vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive 
and climate neutral economy". In December 2019, the EGD was issued. It consisted of an 
initial plan for ensuring the compliance of EU policies with the Paris Agreement and the 
sustainable  development  goals  of  the  2030  Agenda,  formation  of  an  efficient  circular 
economy, fight against biodiversity loss and conservation of environmental systems. The EC 
proposal anticipates a just and inclusive transition to carbon neutrality and puts the health 
and wellbeing of citizens first. 
 
Slovenia welcomes the EGD and assesses that it represents a framework for an overall and 
ambitious arrangement of the key environmental issues of our time. In the field of climate 
change,  the  circular  economy  and  biodiversity,  Slovenia  has  also  set  itself  ambitious 
objectives. 
 
It  commends  the  integration  of  an  external  dimension  when  realising  the  EGD  as  the 
realisation of the goals of the 2030 Agenda and the Paris Agreement requires a strong 
response from the EU at the global level. Action relating to the Green Agenda for the 
Western  Balkans  is  particularly  supported  and  Slovenia  will  actively  participate  in  its 
preparation because more attention must be paid to the countries in the immediate vicinity. 
Through  the  Green  Diplomacy  Network  in  Brussels,  Slovenia  is  actively  involved  in 
discussions on the enhancement of EU climate diplomacy, which focus on the support and 
persuasion of other countries to assume their share of responsibility for climate change, 
including within the UNFCCC framework. While noting that climate change has a great 
impact on water and the water cycle, Slovenia particularly highlights the significance of 
synergies between water diplomacy and EU climate diplomacy. 
 
 
10.2  Slovenia’s international activities 
 
The Republic of Slovenia is actively and at the highest levels participating in international 
activities to fight climate change, in which it represents the vision of climate neutrality by 
2050 and immediate action to limit temperature rises to no more than 1.5°C. It supports the 
work of various international and regional organisations in their fight against climate change 
and  is  actively  involved  in  climate  negotiations  under  the  auspices  of  the  UNFCCC 
(conferences of the Parties). It highlights that an approach at the level of the whole of society 
(international, national, regional and local levels, public and private sectors and civil society) 
is  needed  to  efficiently  deal  with  the  consequences  of  climate  change  and  a  just  and 
inclusive  transition  to  a  climate-neutral  society.  In  particular,  Slovenia  advocates  the 
importance of including the civil society and young people in the formation of climate policies 
and discussions at the international level. 
 
  93 Special  attention  is  dedicated  to  intertwining  the  environment  and  human  rights,  links 
between climate, security, development and the consequences of climate change regarding 
water. Slovenia stresses that the fight against climate change will only be successful if the 
transition from a linear to a circular economy is ensured. 
 
Slovenia strives to promote climate and environmental content and the circular economy 
within the Green Group of six countries (Slovenia, Costa Rica, Singapore, United Arab 
Emirates, Cape Verde and Iceland), which has been operating since 2009 at Slovenia’s 
initiative. In the light of the growing climate crisis, Slovenia gave new impetus to the work of 
the Green Group in September 2019. 
 
10.2.1 International initiatives to which Slovenia has acceded 
 
 Core Group on Human Rights and the Environment  
Together with Costa Rica, Maldives, Morocco and Switzerland, Slovenia is part of the Core 
Group on Human Rights and the Environment, which operates in Geneva. The group has 
been operating since 2011 and is striving for the acknowledgement and enhancement of 
connections between a clean, safe and sustainable environment and the enjoyment of all 
human rights. The group put forward the Resolution of the UN Human Rights Council on 
Human Rights and the Environment (at its session in March) and supported the mandate of 
the Special Rapporteur in this field. The group regularly participates in the work of the UN 
Human Rights Council with joint statements and at side events. 
 
Group of Friends on Water and Peace 
At the initiative of Slovenia, Switzerland, Senegal, Costa Rica and the Geneva Water Hub 
organisation, the Group of Friends on Water and Peace was established on 14 April 2016. 
Among four co-chairs, Slovenia assumed the role of chair on 1 January 2020.The group’s 
purpose  is  to  address  issues  related  to  water  and  peace  and  the  challenges  and 
opportunities enabled by water diplomacy and cooperation in the field of water, including 
promotion of recommendations from the report "A Matter of Survival" of the Global High-
Level Panel on Water and Peace chaired by Dr Danilo Türk. The presidency’s priorities 
include water and armed conflicts, water and data, preparations for the 2023 UN Conference 
on the Water Action Decade and transboundary water cooperation with an emphasis on 
groundwater. 
 
Green Group 
This informal group was established in 2009 at Slovenia’s initiative or the initiative of the then 
Minister of Foreign Affairs and combines six countries at the foreign minister level, i.e. 
Slovenia, Iceland, Costa Rica, Singapore, United Arab Emirates and Cape Verde. It was 
founded  to  promote  issues  of  water,  climate  change  and  sustainable  development  in 
international relations. Regular meetings took place once a year at the level of foreign 
ministers, usually on the sidelines of the UN General Assembly’s sessions in New York. The 
group published joint articles and statements and implemented certain activities. The group’s 
operations died down after 2014 but were revived again at the ministerial meeting on the 
sidelines of the UN General Assembly’s session in New York in September 2019. This was 
followed by a joint statement at COP25 in Madrid in December 2019, a ministerial meeting on 
the sidelines of the Future Sustainability Summit in Abu Dhabi in January 2020 and a joint 
statement on the occasions of world water, bees and oceans days and the UN Secretary 
General’s event, "Climate Moment". 
 
Geneva Pledge 
Arising from the aforementioned initiative for human rights and the environment, the so-called 
Geneva Pledge advocates the recognition and enhancement of connections between human 
rights and climate change. Its signatories, which also include the Republic of Slovenia, have 
committed to promote the enhancement of synergies between both fields, including through 
the mutual cooperation of national experts in both fields. The Pledge, the initiators of which 
  94 were the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights and Costa Rica, has so far 
been endorsed by 33 countries. 
 
Blue Group 
The  Blue  Group  (Germany,  Spain,  France,  Slovenia,  Croatia,  Brazil,  Uruguay,  Egypt, 
Bangladesh, Morocco and Maldives) is involved in human rights to clean drinking water and 
access  to  sanitation.  The  group  is  active  in  the  UN  Human  Rights  Council  and  other 
international forums and events addressing issues related to the rights to clean drinking 
water and sanitation. The Group put forward two resolutions of the UN Human Rights Council 
and the General Assembly on the rights to drinking water and sanitation. 
 
Group of Friends on Climate Change 
This group composed of more than 40 countries was founded at the initiative of France and 
Morocco within the UN in New York in 2014 as part of preparations for the COP21 Climate 
Change  Conference.  The  group  promotes  national  ambitions  when  addressing  climate 
change within the preparations for annual climate negotiations. Slovenia joined this group in 
October 2019. 
 
At COP24 in Katowice, Poland in December 2018, Slovenia supported the statement of the 
High Ambition Coalition about the need to step up the climate ambition by 2020 as per the 
long-term objectives of the Paris Agreement. 
 
Within the Climate Action Summit convened by the UN Secretary-General in September 
2019, the Republic of Slovenia joined the youth engagement and public mobilisation coalition 
led by Ireland and the Marshall Islands. Slovenia engaged in several commitments within the 
summit: initiative of Greece/UNESCO regarding the impact of climate change on cultural and 
natural heritage; initiative of Ireland and the Marshall Islands regarding youth engagement 
and public mobilisation (Kwon Gensh); appeal of Turkey/Kenya/UN-Habitat regarding action 
at the level of cities; initiative of Spain and Peru regarding the increase in air quality for a 
better standard of living; initiative of China and New Zealand within the coalition for nature-
based solutions (Climate Manifesto). 
 
At COP25 in December 2019, the Republic of Slovenia joined the San Jose Principles for 
High Ambition and Integrity in International Carbon Markets, which combines 32 climate-
ambitious countries advocating an efficient arrangement of rules within Article 6 of the Paris 
Agreement and the completion of the Rulebook. 
 
The Republic of Slovenia also joined the Declaration on Children, Youth and Climate Action by 
means of which countries strive for 
inclusive and children-friendly climate policies and ensure the participation of young people 
in decision-making processes relating to climate change at national and global levels. 
 
International Resource Panel (IRP) 
Slovenia  (i.e.  the  Ministry  of  the  Environment  and  Spatial  Planning)  participates  in  the 
Steering Committee of the International Resource Panel, which is one of the most important 
and renowned global research networks. This expert and scientific forum was established in 
2007 within the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) with the intention of leading 
people from overconsumption, waste and ecological damage to a more sustainable future. 
The panel points to the connection between the exploitation of natural resources and the fight 
against climate change. 
Within the UN Summit on Biodiversity in September 2020, Slovenia acceded to the Leaders’ 
Pledge for Nature initiative. 
 
 
 
 
  95 10.3  International  development  cooperation  and  humanitarian  assistance  of  the 
Republic of Slovenia 
 
Climate  change  and  sustainable  development  are  closely  intertwined.  Climate  change 
consequences  cause  increasing  inequalities  within  and  between  countries  and  are thus 
considered the key obstacles to progress in realising the 2030 Agenda. The consequences of 
climate change are most evident in developing countries. Simultaneously, these countries 
possess  the  fewest  capacities  to  tackle  the  consequences  of  climate  change  to  their 
environment and economic and social system. As a developed country, Slovenia is obliged to 
help developing countries in their social and economic development and provide support 
when  implementing  the  measures  of  their  climate  policy.  Furthermore,  Slovenia  is  also 
obliged  to  leverage  financial  assistance  for  implementation  of  climate  measures  in 
developing partner countries. In doing so, it applies all available modalities and contributes its 
share to the realisation of the developed countries’ commitment adopted at the climate 
conference in Copenhagen in 2009 to mobilise together USD 100 billion annually from 
various resources until 2020 and dedicate it as assistance to developing countries when 
tackling the effects of climate change. Within the framework of the Paris Agreement, this 
commitment was further upgraded with the commitment that this assistance will be further 
intensified in the coming years. 
 
In  accordance  with  international  commitments,  Slovenia  will  strive  to  increase  official 
development aid to 0.33 per cent by 2030.By putting climate measures to the forefront of 
Slovenia’s  international  development  cooperation,  the  scope  of  the  so-called  climate 
financing  will  gradually  increase,  and  Slovenia  will  ensure  the  meeting  of  international 
commitments particularly with the suitable mobilisation of earmarked funds from the Climate 
Change Fund. 
 
10.4  Human rights and the environment 
 
Slovenia strives for the international proclamation of the right to a healthy living environment, 
which is laid down in Article 72 of the Constitution of the Republic of Slovenia. The Republic 
of Slovenia has already entered the right to drinking water in its Constitution, and this field is 
governed by the Environmental Protection Act. The human right to a healthy environment 
means that the objectives and measures observe an individual’s right to live in a healthy, 
clean, safe and sustainable environment. Today, this right is recognised in various forms in 
numerous countries and the highest UN representatives are also striving for its proclamation 
at the global level. 
 
11 IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC ASPECTS 
 
The impact assessment of the socio-economic aspects will only be prepared by 2030.The 
GreenMod Slovenia model was used for the assessment of macroeconomic and sectoral 
effects of scenarios for implementing measures in Slovenia until 2030. GreenMod Slovenia is 
the first energy CGE model designed especially for Slovenia. Its functioning and initial results 
are  considered  a  technical  basis  for  adjusting  and  upgrading  the  model  in  the  future, 
particularly in the sense of replacing or introducing new energy resources and economic 
instruments for attaining emission objectives and the testing of various scenarios or the 
evaluation of specific projects (a detailed description of the model is to be found in expert 
bases). 
 
The macroeconomic effects of scenarios with additional measures (moderate – WEM and 
ambitious – WAM) by 2050 and the effects by individual sectors were assessed consistently. 
Below, we provide the results of simulations of macroeconomic and sectoral effects by 2030, 
whereby the results for the WAM scenario comply with the NECP scenario. 
 
-  Additional  energy  investments  increase  energy  efficiency  and  thus  lower  the 
  96 consumption of energy inputs per production unit in individual economic activities or 
reduce final energy consumption in households. Lower input costs have a beneficial 
effect on the growth in workforce demand, unemployment rate reduction and production 
growth. The final impact on consumer prices is positive as these are expected to drop 
somewhat as per the WOM scenario (by –0.2 per cent in the WEM scenario in 2030 and 
by –0.3 per cent in the WAM scenario). An increase in disposable income of households 
is reflected in higher final private consumption. In the WEM scenario, the latter is higher 
by 0.4 per cent in 2021 and by 1.5 per cent in 2030 if compared to the scenario with no 
additional measures. In the WAM scenario, private consumption is higher by 0.9 per cent 
in 2021 and by 2.2 per cent in 2030 if compared to private consumption in the WOM 
scenario.  
      The positive effects of additional measures are also reflected in increased savings by 
companies and households with a simultaneous reduction in the current budget deficit of 
the state, which will increase its revenue due to enhanced economic activity. Increased 
total savings are reflected in higher total gross investment, which is said to be higher by 
2.8 per cent in 2021 and by 1.1 per cent in 2030 in the WOM scenario; in the WAM 
scenario, it is anticipated to be higher by 4.5 per cent in 2021 and by 4.0 per cent in 
2030 in accordance with investment in the WOM scenario. 
Increased economic activity is followed accordingly by employment in the Slovenian 
business sector, which is higher by 0.4 per cent in 2021 and by 1.5 per cent in 2030 as 
per the WEM scenario than in the WOM scenario. The WAM scenario displays a 0.7- 
and 1.4-per cent increase respectively. Changed investment structure also affects the 
change in production structure of the Slovenian business sector, which will be evident 
most significantly after 2030. 
Increased energy efficiency and subsequent lower consumption of energy inputs impact 
the increase in international competitiveness of domestic production and higher increase 
in exports (the WEM scenario: by 0.37 per cent in 2021 as per the WOM scenario and by 
0.6 per cent in 2030; the WAM scenario: by 0.8 per cent in 2021 as per the WOM 
scenario and by 1.2 per cent in 2030) if compared to imports (which is in the WAM 
scenario higher by 0.5 per cent after 2021 as per the WOM scenario in an individual year 
up to 2030 and by 0.2 per cent in the WEM scenario). 
Positive results of the additional measures planned within both scenarios with additional 
measures are finally reflected in an increased GDP. As per the WEM scenario, GDP is 
said to be higher by 1.2 per cent in 2021 if compared to the WOM scenario, and by 1.1 
per cent in 2030. As per the WAM scenario, GDP is said to be higher by 1.8 per cent in 
2021 if compared to GDP in the WOM scenario, and by 2.1 per cent in 2030. 
 
-  Both scenarios with additional measures have an unfavourable effect on real household 
disposable income in the first quintile group. With such a policy, it would be sensible to 
adopt suitable mitigation measures for the 20 per cent of households with the lowest 
income.  Despite  the  foregoing,  it  must  also  be  highlighted  that  real  household 
consumption  through  all  quintile  groups  does  not  decrease  in  the  scenarios  with 
additional measures. 
 
-  Sectoral effects are oriented in the same direction for both scenarios (WAM and WEM); 
the only difference is that the effects as per the WAM scenario are stronger or the 
magnitude of change is somewhat larger. With regard to specific activities, we assess 
that  the  chemical  industry,  manufacture  of  non-metallic  mineral  products  and  other 
mostly non-energy intensive activities would not suffer a deterioration of their competitive 
situation due to additional measures despite a price increase. Competitiveness of the 
paper industry worsens despite the lower cost of capital and subsequent increase in 
capital demand in the paper industry relatively as per the price and demand in the WOM 
scenario. The situation in the manufacture of coke and refined petroleum products is 
quite similar. 
 
-  It is assessed that the supply of, and demand for, chemical products, non-metallic 
  97 mineral  products,  metal  products  and  products  from  non-energy  intensive  activities 
would not decrease relatively due to additional measures, and neither would their foreign 
trade.  This  applies  to  both  scenarios  with  additional  measures.  Quite  the  opposite 
applies to the supply of, and demand for, coke, refined petroleum products and paper. 
 
From the aspect of a fair transition to a climate-neutral society, the WAM scenario is (after 
2022) and the WEM scenario is (throughout) unfavourable for the 20 per cent of households 
with the lowest income (and only the WEM scenario for the second quintile group from 2024 
onwards),  which  is  why  Slovenia  will  adopt  mitigation  measures  for  them  (see  chapter 
8.2.4.3). If we decide to increase tax on fossil fuels in order to reduce emissions despite an 
increase in economic welfare in scenarios with additional measures, it would be sensible to 
combine this financial instrument with the application of a tax revenue to reduce the rate of 
social security contributions or with an increase in household social benefits. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Number: 801-08/21-5/  
 
Date: 13 July 2021    
 
EPA 1828-VIII 
National Assembly 
Igor Zorčič 
President 
  98 