 
 
Informative Report 
Strategy of Latvia for the Achievement of Climate Neutrality by 2050 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2019 
   
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre) Table of Contents 
 
Terms .......................................................................................................................................... 3 
Abbreviations ............................................................................................................................. 5 
Introduction ................................................................................................................................ 6 
1. Objective, Indicators, and Directions for Action .................................................................... 9 
1.1. Overarching Objective and Intermediate Objectives of the Strategy ........................... 9 
1.2. Indicators .................................................................................................................... 10 
1.3. Action Directions ....................................................................................................... 11 
1.4. General Principles for the Implementation of LCD and the Strategy ........................ 12 
2. Basic Assumptions ............................................................................................................... 14 
3. Linkage of the Strategy with Existing Legal Acts and Policy Planning Documents ........... 18 
4. Current Progress of Latvia in Advancement Towards Climate Neutrality .......................... 21 
4.1. Structure and Dynamics of GHG Emissions (Excluding the LULUCF Sector) ........ 21 
4.2. LULUCF Sector Net Emissions – Structure and Dynamics ...................................... 24 
4.3. Joint Progression of Latvia Towards Climate Neutrality ........................................... 25 
5. Most Significant Factors Affecting the Amount of Occurrence of GHG Emissions of Latvia 
in Different Sectors of National Economy ............................................................................... 27 
5.1. Potential of Innovations .............................................................................................. 27 
5.2. Energy Sector ............................................................................................................. 27 
5.3. Transport .................................................................................................................... 29 
5.4. Agriculture and Land Use .......................................................................................... 30 
5.5. Use of Resources ........................................................................................................ 31 
5.6. Role of Local Governments and the Urban Environment .......................................... 34 
6. Potential Solutions for Ensuring Low Carbon Development ............................................... 36 
6.1. Research and Innovations in Low Carbon Technologies ........................................... 36 
6.2. Comprehensive Energy Efficiency ............................................................................. 38 
6.3. Sustainable Energy ..................................................................................................... 40 
6.4. Resource-efficient and Environmentally Friendly Transport ..................................... 41 
6.5. Sustainable Land Management and Agriculture ........................................................ 44 
6.6. Sustainable Consumption and Manufacturing ........................................................... 46 
6.7. Sustainable Local Governments and Urban Environment ......................................... 47 
7. Implementation and Review of the Strategy ........................................................................ 50 
7.1. Parties Involved in the Implementation of the Strategy ............................................. 50 
7.2. Instruments to be Used in the Implementation of the Strategy .................................. 51 
7.3. Review of the Strategy ............................................................................................... 54 
8. Public Participation .............................................................................................................. 55 
 
   
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  2 Terms 
 
Renewable energy  wind, solar, geothermal, wave, tidal, and water energy, as well as 
sources  aerothermal  energy  (thermal  energy  accumulating  in  the  air), 
geothermal energy (thermal energy under the surface of mainland), and 
hydrothermal energy (thermal energy in surface waters), gases from 
waste landfill sites and sewage treatment plants, biogas, and biomass. 
Biomass  a resource of organic origin the energy of which is transformed into 
mechanical  energy,  thermal  energy,  and  electricity  as  a  result  of 
chemical transformation. 
Infrastructure  a component of the territorial structure of national economy consisting 
of the transport system, communications system, trade system, energy 
system, water management system, and waste management system, as 
well  as  dwellings,  schools,  health  protection,  cultural,  and  sports 
objects and other residential care objects and their layout in a territory. 
Innovation  a process where new scientific, technical, social, and cultural ideas, 
developments,  and  technologies  or  ideas,  developments,  and 
technologies of another field are translated into a marketable and 
competitive product or service. 
Kyoto Protocol  an international treaty (adopted in 1997, came into force in 2005) 
which  has  been  adopted  within  the  scope  of  the  United  Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), 1992. The 
Protocol provides for the countries (parties to the UNFCCC) to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions based on the scientific consensus that (1) 
global warming is occurring and (2) it is extremely likely that man-
made carbon dioxide emissions have predominantly caused it. The 
Kyoto  Protocol  and  the  Doha  Amendment  to  the  Kyoto  Protocol 
adopted in 2012 lays down liabilities for its Parties until 2020. 
Cluster  a cooperation network of merchants, research, educational and other 
related institutions which operates in a specific sector of national 
economy or in interrelated sectors, uses related technologies and labour 
resources of similar profile, consists of legally independent merchants 
which are competing with each other, and concurrently implements 
mutual cooperation. 
Climate  long-term regime of weather conditions forming as a result of solar 
radiation, nature of the Earthʼs surface, and the atmospheric circulation 
processes related thereto. Climate is characterised by medium-term and 
long-term (at least 30 years) values of atmospheric physical indicators 
inherent to the Earth as a whole or to a specific territory (country or 
region). 
Climate change  changes in the state of climate identified (for example, using statistical 
tests) by changes in the average values and/or the variability of such 
properties which are continuing for a longer period of time, usually for 
a decade or more. Climate change can occur as a result of different 
natural internal processes or also under the influence of external forces, 
for  example,  exposure  to  solar  cycles,  volcanic  eruptions,  and 
continuous anthropogenic changes in the atmospheric composition and 
land use. 
Climate neutrality  the state where human activity causes net zero impact on the climate 
system. Greenhouse gas emissions need to be balanced against carbon 
dioxide removals to achieve such state.  
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  3 Climate resilience  social and ecological capacity of the systems (1) to absorb stresses and 
maintain their functions in the face of external pressures imposed by 
climate  change,  as  well  as  (2)  to  reorganise  their  activities  in 
preparation for future impacts of climate change. 
IPCC  Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change the objective of which is 
to ensure objective, scientific opinion on climate change, its natural, 
political,  and  economic  impact  and  risks,  as  well  as  the  possible 
responses. 
Low carbon  sustainable1 economic, environmental, and social development which 
development  is  based  on  both  low  anthropogenic  (caused  by  human  activity) 
  greenhouse gas emissions and high level of carbon dioxide removals2 
  and resilience against climate change, reduction of the risks caused 
  thereby, and use of the benefits created by climate change. 
Organic soils  Soils with high content of organic matter.  
Paris Agreement  the first general legally binding global agreement in the field of climate 
the objective of which is to strengthen global action for the prevention 
of climate change and to hold global warming well below 2 °C above 
the pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature 
increase to 1,5 °C. The Paris Agreement was adopted in the Conference 
of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change in December 2015. 
Park & ride  system for parking vehicles and transfer which provides for the link-up 
of parking lots for vehicles with the public transport network in order 
to use the public transport more fully and to relieve the transport flow 
in the city centre. 
Greenhouse gases  CO  (carbon dioxide), CH  (methane), N O (nitrous oxide), nitrogen 
2 4 2
trifluoride  (NF )  and  fluorinated  gases  or  F-gases – SF   (sulphur 
3 6
hexafluoride), PFC (perfluorocarbons), HFC (hydrofluorocarbons). 
Greenhouse effect  the process of warming the atmospheric air occurring as the stratum 
created  by  the  water  vapour  and  the  greenhouse  gases  in  the 
atmosphere precludes the Earth from reflecting the heat received from 
the  Sun  (in  the  form  of  infrared  radiation),  therefore  the  heat 
accumulates  in  the  lowest  strata  of  the  atmosphere,  causing  and 
facilitating climate change. 
 
   
 
1 The concept of long-term development is defined in the Report of the United Nations World Commission on 
Environment and Development Our Common Future (also called Report of the Brundtland Commission, 1987) 
and has been used internationally and extensively since the UN conference of 1992 in Rio de Janeiro Environment 
and Development. Sustainable development is defined as “development that meets the needs of the present without 
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”. Sustainable development is characterised 
by  three  interrelated  dimensions:  environmental,  economic,  and  social  dimension.  This  means  that  strict 
environmental protection and climate resilience requirements does not preclude high economic indicators, that 
economic growth may not degrade the environment, and concurrently high living standard is ensured. 
2 Carbon dioxide (CO ) removals are a process where as a result of photosynthesis organic matters, as well as 
2 
oxygen are synthesised from inorganic carbon dioxide and water compounds, using light energy.  
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  4 Abbreviations 
 
RES – renewable energy sources 
UN – United Nations Organization 
CCS – carbon capture and storage 
CCU – carbon capture and use 
CO – carbon dioxide 
2 
CNG – compressed natural gas 
EC – European Commission 
EC Communication – “A Clean Planet for all! A European strategic long-term vision for a 
prosperous, modern, competitive and climate neutral economy” 
EU – European Union 
ETS – EU Emissions trading scheme 
HPP – hydroelectric power plant 
GDP – gross domestic product 
IPCC – Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
CEF 2030 – The 2030 climate and energy framework 
Convention – The UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 
UAA – utilised agricultural area 
Cabinet – Cabinet of the Republic of Latvia 
NACE – EU Statistical Classification of Economic Activities 
NDC –  Nationally  Determined  Contribution  (here:  for  the  implementation  of  the  Paris 
Agreement) 
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
LCD – low carbon development 
GHG – greenhouse gases 
Strategy – Strategy of Latvia for the Achievement of Climate Neutrality by 2050 
TEN-T – Trans-European Transport Network 
MoEPRD – Ministry of Environmental Protection and Regional Development 
WPP – wind power plant 
LULUCF – land use, land use change and forestry sector 
GPP – green public procurement   
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  5 Introduction 
 
The Strategy is a long-term policy planning document which has been developed to 
increase the economic competitiveness of Latvian national economy, as well as to ensure a safe 
living environment for inhabitants of Latvia concurrently with the restriction and mitigation of 
climate change. 
As the LCD efforts unite the majority of the most influential economies of the world, 
the development of the Strategy at international and EU level is determined by the Paris 
Agreement  of  The  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  1994 
(hereinafter – the Convention) and Regulation 2018/19993of the European Parliament and of 
the Council of 11 December 2018 on the Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action, 
whereas at national level – by the Declaration on the Intended Activities of the Cabinet Headed 
by Arturs Krišjānis Kariņš4. 
Within the context of the international policy, the Strategy has been developed to 
promote: 
•  the fulfilment of GHG emission reduction commitments in accordance with the 
Paris Agreement in a cost-efficient manner; 
•  monitoring in relation to the actual and expected progress towards the reduction of 
GHG emissions5. 
 
The Strategy  also  needs to  be developed because LCD directions have not  been 
developed in the national level policy planning documents of Latvia, as well as there is a lack 
of coherent policy for the limitation of GHG emissions. 
Historically, in the middle of the 1750s, upon rapid development of the manufacturing 
and substantial increase in coal consumption, the atmospheric pollution caused by human 
activity and also GHG emissions, particularly carbon dioxide, started to increase dramatically, 
amplifying the greenhouse effect. 
In 2018, in comparison to the 1880s, the increase in the global average air temperature 
was 1.1 °C6, however, in Latvia this increase has been more substantial – 1,5 °C. Nowadays, 
the current records in terms of both the average and maximum temperature and precipitation, 
the number and strength of storms, and other parameters are being continuously surpassed. The 
concentration of CO  which is closely linked to the increase in the average air temperature 
2
keeps increasing and already reached 412 ppm7 in June 2019. 
International  basic  conditions  of  the  climate  change  policy  are  included  in  the 
Convention. A new significant long-term document – the Paris Agreement – was adopted in the 
Conference of the Parties to the Convention in Paris in December 2015. The objective of the 
Agreement is to strengthen the global action for the prevention of climate change and to hold 
the global warming well below 2 °C in comparison with the pre-industrial level and to pursue 
efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5 °C as this would significantly reduce the risks 
and impacts of climate change. The Paris Agreement provides for promoting the allocation of 
investments according to low-carbon and climate-resilient development. 
 
3 Regulation (EU) 2018/1999 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 December 2018 on the 
Governance  of  the  Energy  Union  and  Climate  Action.  Available  online:  https://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/LV/TXT/?uri=CELEX:32018R1999 
4 Declaration on the Intended Activities of the Cabinet Headed by Arturs Krišjānis Kariņš. Available online: 
https://www.mk.gov.lv/sites/default/files/editor/kk-valdibas-deklaracija_red-gala.pdf 
5 Greenhouse gases (GHG) are carbon dioxide (CO ), methane(CH ), nitrogen oxide (N O), hydrofluorocarbons 
2 4 2
(HFC), perfluorocarbons (PFC), nitrogen trifluoride (NF ), and sulphur hexafluoride (SF ). The most important 
3 6
GHGs are CO , CH , and N O. 
2 4 2
6  Global  Temperature  Anomalies  from  1880  to  2018.  6 February 2019.  Available  online: 
https://svs.gsfc.nasa.gov/4626 
7 Ppm (parts per million) – a part per million, the relation of the mass of the substance against the whole mass of 
air, CO  concentration in the air. Available online: http://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/carbon-dioxide/.  
2
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  6 The IPCC Report8 indicates that the current commitments of the world countries within 
the scope of the Paris Agreement for the climate change mitigation are insufficient and will not 
ensure restriction of global warming within the limits of 1.5 °C, therefore, the countries must 
enhance the level of ambitions in relation to the climate goals brought forward in order to land 
on the correct trajectory to achieve the objective. 
Scientific evidence confirms that the global warming caused by human activity has 
already reached 1 °C above pre-industrial levels and continues to increase by approximately 
0.2 °C per ten years. If sufficient work is not put into the field of the climate policy at 
international level, the global increase of temperature might reach 2 °C soon after 2060 and 
could keep rising. 
The IPCC Report confirms that approximately 4 % of the global terrestrial land area is 
projected to be affected by ecosystem transformations at 1 °C of global warming, but such 
impact will affect already 13 % of the land area if global warming is to reach 2 °C. It is 
foreseeable that, if global warming will reach 2 °C, 99 % of the world coral reefs will disappear. 
Global warming of approximately 1.5 °C to 2 °C can initiate processes resulting in melting of 
the Greenland ice sheet. Under certain circumstances sea-level can rise even by 7 metres, and 
this will directly affect coastal territories throughout the world, including the low plains and 
islands of the coast of Europe. The Arctic ice is already melting rapidly during the summer, and 
it has a negative impact on the biological diversity of the Nordic countries and the livelihood 
of the local inhabitants. 
The combat against climate change caused by the increase in GHG emissions is also 
one of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals. Climate change can cause problems related 
to food availability, human health, welfare, employment, national economic development, 
safety,  spatial  development,  natural  integrity,  biological  diversity,  and  other  fields.  The 
implementation of LCD is not just a challenge, but at the same time an opportunity, as upon its 
implementation benefits would arise not only in the environmental dimension, but also in the 
social and economic dimensions (see Figure 1). 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Low carbon development and dimensions of sustainable development 
 
8 IPCC Special Report Global warming of 1.5°C (an IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 
1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of 
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate 
poverty). Available online: https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/.  
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  7  
The Strategy should be implemented as comprehensively, rapidly and efficiently as 
possible, thus both fulfilling the international goals and improving the living standard of 
inhabitants, and also strengthening the competitiveness of Latvian economy (by implementing 
such measures as improvement of energy efficiency, promotion of the use of local (renewable) 
energy sources, implementation of the circular economy and bioeconomy, promoting the 
development and manufacturing of climate technology innovations in Latvia). 
The  Strategy  is  a  long-term  strategic  document  to  be  introduced  by  horizontal 
integration of the GHG and climate resilience goals in all sectors of national economy. In 
parallel with the introduction of the Strategy, a periodic evaluation of the progress of the 
Strategy and the effectiveness of its implementation should be provided, ensuring achievement 
of the objectives of the Strategy. 
The  Strategy  first  sets  out  an  outline  of  the  key  assumptions  made  during  its 
development followed by the definition of the objective and performance-based indicators of 
the  Strategy  according  to  which  progress  could  be  determined.  Afterwards  the  current 
information regarding the progress of Latvia in limitation of GHG emissions during the 
development  of  the  Strategy  has  been  provided  and  expanded  in  the  following  chapter, 
identifying the most essential factors of occurrence of GHG emissions which are specific to 
Latvia. Afterwards the potential solutions for the implementation of LCD have been offered, as 
well as a report on the implementation of the Strategy and indications regarding public 
participation are provided. 
   
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  8 1. Objective, Indicators, and Directions for Action 
 
1.1. Overarching Objective and Intermediate Objectives of the Strategy 
 
LCD is a process that must be implemented by striving for climate neutrality. 
The overarching objective of the Strategy: climate neutrality of Latvia in 2050. 
As the final objective of the implementation of LCD is achieving climate neutrality of 
Latvia, it is essential not only to reduce GHG emissions, but also to increase CO  removals. 
2
Therefore there are two strategic objectives: 
1) reduction of GHG emissions in all sectors of national economy; 
2) increase of CO  removals. 
2
The objective should be achieved in three stages of reduction of GHG emissions (in 
decades). The performance-based indicators to be achieved are presented in Table 1. 
 
Table 1 
 
Performance-based Indicators of the Strategy (Overarching Objective and Intermediate 
Objectives) 
 
Objectives 
  Base year  Projection 
19909  for 202010 
2030  2040  2050 
GHG emissions 
-65 % (in  -85 % (in 
(without  the  26 299 
-55 %  comparison  comparison 
LULUCF  kt CO eq. 
2 with 1990)  with 1990) 
sector) 
Net-zero 
CO   removals  emissions 
2 Climate 
and  GHG  -9828  2094  ≤1047  (removals of 
neutrality 
emissions in the  kt CO eq.  kt CO eq.  kt CO eq.  the sector 
2 2 2 (non-reducible 
LULUCF  (removals)  (emissions)  (emissions)  compensated 
GHG 
sector  emissions of 
emissions  are 
the sector) 
compensated 
Transition  by removals in 
towards  the  LULUCF 
climate  sector) 
neutrality  -38 %* (in  -76%* (in 
16 471 
(total  GHG  -16 %  comparison  comparison 
kt CO eq. 
emissions,  2 with 1990)  with 1990) 
including  the 
LULUCF 
sector) 
* the objective is deemed fulfilled if the deviation is ±5 % 
 
The objectives for 2030 and 2040 encircled with a yellow frame in Table 1 may be 
changed if studies (the Protocol Decision of the Strategy provides for the conducting of research 
by sectoral ministries as to how to advance towards climate neutrality within the scope of their 
 
9 According to the GHG inventory submitted to UNFCCC in 2019. 
10 Indicative estimates regarding the advancement in the direction of achieving the objectives according to the data 
available in 2019. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  9 liability/area) and discussions lead to an agreement on the most appropriate trajectory for 
achieving the objective of climate neutrality in 2050. 
The relevant tiered approach for achieving the common overarching objective (climate 
neutrality in 2050) has been specified according to the so called innovation S-curve or Bass 
Diffusion Model which provides a mathematical description of the manner in which new 
innovations are adapted under the influence of interaction between the existing and potential 
user. According to this theory, the initial section of the curve of innovations is flat because 
initially innovations are used only by the innovators, afterwards also by imitators, whereas, in 
the middle section the number of users rapidly increases and the majority starts using the 
technologies. At the final section, the rate of increase in users of technology decreases once 
again and the increase in users is slow. Considering that the implementation of LCD largely 
depends on the speed in  which “green” technologies and innovations are spreading,  the 
objectives of the Strategy of Latvia have also been determined according to the abovementioned 
theory, i.e., the highest reduction of GHG emission (-38 %) must be achieved in the middle 
section (2030-2040). 
 
1.2. Indicators 
 
Indicators which point to the progression trends (moving closer or further away from 
the objective of climate neutrality) are important for the assessment of the progress made in the 
implementation of the Strategy. 
 
1)  Intensity of GHG emissions (t CO  eq. 11 per mill. EUR) 
2
 
The Strategy not only provides for the economic development of Latvia and increase in 
GDP,  but  also  for  reduction  of  GHG  emissions  in  all  sectors  of  national  economy 
simultaneously. The intensity of GHG emissions is an indicator based on which the extent to 
which economic growth is “linked” to the generated amount of GHG emissions can be 
established. Reduction in the intensity of GHG emissions points to the implementation of LCD 
which has also contributed to economic growth in the country. 
 
2)  Intensity of GHG emissions from the energy sector – GHG emissions per total 
consumption of primary energy sources (t CO eq. per total consumption of 
2 
energy sources) 
 
Taking into consideration that the sector of service provision is relatively developed in 
Latvia, however, manufacturing is less developed (the sectors of Latvian national economy 
specialising in the field of service provision generate almost 65 % of the total added value), the 
indicator which is more related to the manufacturing processes and energy consumption is the 
intensity of GHG emissions of the energy sector per total consumption of primary energy 
sources. This indicator includes the consumption of energy sources in the production of thermal 
energy and electricity (transformation sector) and in the final consumption which, in turn, 
includes all sectors of national economy (manufacturing and construction, transport (transport 
services form the most essential part of the service export), agriculture, forestry), as well as 
households. 
 
 
11 CO  – the equivalent of carbon dioxide is a unit of measurement expressed in CO  emissions to which 
2 eq 2
emissions of different greenhouse gases are compared on the basis of the global-warming potential created thereby. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  10 3)  Changes in the amount of GHG emissions in relation to the previous year on 
sectoral basis (kt CO  eq.) 
2
 
In order to assess the dynamics and trends of GHG emissions in different sectors of 
national economy, each year (starting from 1990) in Latvia GHG emissions and removals 
within energy, transport, industrial processes and product use, agriculture, LULUCF, and waste 
management sectors are recorded. Annual assessment of changes in the amount of GHG 
emissions in each sector in relation to the previous period allows to ascertain that advancement 
towards climate neutrality is continuous and takes place in all sectors of national economy. 
 
4)  Total balance of emissions and removals of the land use, land-use change and 
forestry sector 
 
As the LULUCF sector has a special role in advancement towards climate neutrality, 
this indicator shows whether/to what extent the whole LULUCF sector is able to compensate 
its own GHG emissions in the current year. 
 
1.3. Action Directions 
 
•  Two basic approaches to achieving climate neutrality 
 
Two basic approaches may be used to achieve climate neutrality: 
1)  technological solutions; 
2)  change of the lifestyle. 
 
The technological solutions approach includes solutions primarily focusing on direct 
reductions of GHG emissions (technological and process solutions). Upon implementing this 
tactic, substantial investments should be provided: 
o  in direct reductions of GHG emissions (in energy, transport, agriculture, waste 
management, industrial processes, and other sectors); 
o  in  development  and  commercialisation  of  “green”  innovations  which,  in  the 
optimum scenario, would also provide a possibility for the export of innovative 
technologies. 
In turn, the approach of changing the lifestyle includes solutions primarily focusing on 
changing the lifestyle and indirect reductions of GHG emissions by implementing: 
o  extensive measures for informing and educating the public to ensure the awareness 
and interest of each inhabitant in the advancement towards climate neutrality; 
o  greening of the tax system by adapting the whole tax system so that the general 
long-term  direction  of  the  State  would  be  clear  both  to  the  inhabitants  and 
merchants (i.e., so that tax policy would not  give contradictory signals), and 
economic stimuli to choose more environmentally friendly habits and technologies 
would be created for everyone. 
 
•  Solutions for the implementation of LCD in different sectors of national 
economy 
 
To implement the Strategy successfully, it is necessary to plan appropriate actions which 
include both general (horizontal) implementation of the LCD principles and also actions in 
sectoral policies, including all sectors of national economy: 
o  ensure that LCD aspects are integrated in all studies, low carbon innovations and 
technologies are commercialised and transferred to all sectors of national economy; 
o  ensure comprehensive energy efficiency in every sector of national economy; 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  11 o  ensure that only renewable energy sources are used for energy generation in all 
sectors (where it is technologically possible), and that local energy sources are used 
and the energy market is completely connected and freely accessible to everyone; 
o  ensure  optimum  transport  infrastructure,  to  change  the  travel  behaviour  of 
inhabitants, to increase the use of resource-efficient and environmentally friendly 
types of vehicles; 
o  ensure sustainable land management, achieving high productivity in agriculture, as 
well as managing the forests of Latvia in a sustainable manner; 
o  ensure  that  inhabitants  of  Latvia  are  implementing  environmentally  friendly 
lifestyle and companies have adapted to the tendencies of the global market and are 
successfully implementing circular economy; 
o  ensure sustainable development of local governments, promoting smart, climate-
neutral, and flexible urban environment, inter alia, choosing the green infrastructure 
in the development of urban environment. 
 
More detailed description of action directions is provided further in the text (see 
Chapter 6). 
Specific measures and the contribution of different sectors of national economy to 
achieving the objective of climate neutrality will be specified in subsequent NECPs, as well as 
in sectoral planning documents of a shorter term. 
 
1.4. General Principles for the Implementation of LCD and the Strategy 
 
Movement towards climate neutrality must go hand in hand with ensuring the economic 
welfare and social justice (see Figure 1). 
General (horizontal) principles of LCD (determine what should be implemented): 
•  restructuring of national economy, optimisation of processes in a cost-efficient 
manner  without  reducing  competitiveness  (ensuring  stable  and  increasing 
decoupling of GDP from GHG emissions); 
•  increasing the resource-efficiency, including energy efficiency (principle: energy 
efficiency first); 
•   promoting the use of renewable energy sources; 
•  the State does not subsidise the use of fossil energy sources; 
•  development and commercialisation of green innovations and research; 
•  creation of new green working places; 
•  promotion of mutual communication, cooperation, symbiosis, and networking; 
•  horizontal integration of the abovementioned principles into all policies of national 
economy and investments of the public funding is ensured. 
 
General principles for the implementation of the Strategy (determine how the Strategy 
should be implemented): 
•  measures with the lowest costs are implemented first; 
•  impact of a particular measure is evaluated not only in short-term, but also in long-
term; 
•  reliance on nationally available resources; 
•  economic  development  is  not  based  on  intense  consumption  of  energy  and 
resources12; 
 
12 Upon continuing the current development which is based on intense consumption of energy and resources, 
resources of the planet are being depleted and its sustainability is at risk. In order to sustain ourselves in 2050, 
taking into account the number of inhabitants and the current consumption trends, we will need the equivalent of 
more than two planets in total. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  12 •  socially  just  transition –  social  dialogue  is  ensured,  the  specific  features  and 
possibilities of each sector of national economy are taken into consideration; 
•  development is not in contradiction with the objectives of biological diversity, 
nature and environmental protection. 
 
   
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  13 2. Basic Assumptions 
 
Upon developing the Strategy and the vision included therein, as well as choosing the 
potential solutions, several assumptions in relation to trends in Latvia and in the world until the 
middle of this century were made – the macro-economic situation and the number of inhabitants 
in Latvia, climate change, economic progress of other countries of the world, the awareness of 
inhabitants of Latvia as to climate change, the development of green technologies and price 
trends, as well as the consequences of failure to act in relation to the reduction of climate 
change. 
 
•  Macro-economic situation of Latvia 
 
GDP of Latvia will continue to increase13 and will reach EUR 42 billion in 2050 (at 
constant prices of 2010). The number of inhabitants will decrease to 1.5 mill. 
 
•  Climate change 
 
The IPCC Report14 established that losses upon increase in the global air temperature 
by 2 °C would be significantly higher than at 1.5 °C, therefore, the need both to urgently reduce 
GHG emissions and to introduce thought-out measures for adaptation to climate change has 
been emphasised. Scientific research shows that the risks which were previously foreseen in 
relation to the increase of global temperature within the limits of 1.5 °C to 2 °C are much higher 
than assumed hitherto and the spiral of irreversible climate change might set in between the 
very limits of 1.5 °C and 2 °C. 
According to the 2017 report of valsts sabiedrība ar ierobežotu atbildību “Latvijas 
Vides, ģeoloģijas un meteoroloģijas centrs” [limited liability company Latvian Environment, 
Geology and Meteorology Centre], Klimata pārmaiņu scenāriji Latvijai [Climate Change 
Scenarios for Latvia]15, the air temperature in Latvia will increase on average by 3.5 °C to 
5.5 °C by the end of the century. The maximum annual air temperature in Latvia might even 
reach +35 °C by the end of the century. However, until 2100 the most significant increase will 
be in the minimum air temperature – on average by 9.3 °C to 13.5 °C. 
The analysis of current climate conditions, as well as future scenarios of climate change 
graphically demonstrate that distinct climate change trends will continue throughout this 
century. The most significant changes will affect the extreme values of climate parameters 
indicating that weather conditions not characteristic to and extreme for Latvia will be a more 
frequent reality in the future. 
Such risks as changes of seasons, i.e., changes of the vegetation period, increased fire 
hazard, proliferation of pests and pathogens, tree diseases, expulsion of local species, entering 
of new species, spread of diseases of the respiratory system, flood caused by precipitation, wind 
surges, extremely strong wind gusts, occurrence of disturbances in electricity supply, reduction 
of frost, black frost, drying of soil, eutrophication, damages to infrastructures, overheating of 
equipment, spread of infectious diseases, and heat strokes are anticipated as the most essential 
risks caused by climate change in Latvia. Thus, climate change will cause risks in Latvia and, 
therefore, also losses in the field of health and welfare, civil protection, agriculture and forestry, 
 
13 Macro-economic forecast until 2030 of the Ministry of Economics (2018) extrapolated by the FEI until 2050. 
14 IPCC Special Report Global warming of 1.5°C (an IPCC Special Report on the impacts of global warming of 
1.5°C above pre-industrial levels and related global greenhouse gas emission pathways, in the context of 
strengthening the global response to the threat of climate change, sustainable development, and efforts to eradicate 
poverty). Available online: https://www.ipcc.ch/sr15/. 
15  Latvian  Environment,  Geology  and  Meteorology  Centre.  Report  Klimata  pārmaiņu  scenāriji  Latvijai 
(2017). Available online in Latvian: http://www2.meteo.lv/klimatariks/zinojums.pdf. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  14 tourism  and  landscape  planning,  construction  and  planning  of  infrastructure,  as  well  as 
biological diversity and diversity of ecosystem services. 
 
•  International context 
 
It is projected that the awareness of inhabitants regarding the need to act for the 
mitigation of climate change in Europe, as well as in other countries of the world will increase. 
The Communication published by the EC on 28 November 2018, A Clean Planet for 
all! A European strategic long-term vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate 
neutral economy (EC Communication), explains that only the full implementation of the agreed 
EU legislation will already ensure reductions of GHG emissions of around 45 % by 2030 and 
around 60 % by 2050. However, the EU should strategically strive towards climate neutrality 
in 2050 which, like by the majority of EU Member States, is also supported by Latvia16 
believing that the EU must take the leadership role in the fight against climate change, as well 
as expressing readiness to review the NDC submitted to the EU for the implementation of the 
Paris Agreement or the goals for the reduction of GHG emissions for 2030. 
As the Paris Agreement has been ratified by almost all countries of the world, it is 
assumed that all of them will move towards low carbon development. Different industries are 
already becoming aware of the advantages of circular economy, thus the demand for energy-
intensive raw materials will decrease, while the productivity of materials will increase and the 
amount of generated waste will decrease. 
Associations of different sectors have also expressed support and undertaken to take 
active measures in the field of climate change mitigation, voluntarily setting for themselves 
goals for climate change mitigation to be achieved by 2050, for example, the European 
Chemical Industry Council, the International Air Transport Association (IATA), and the Air 
Transport Action Group (ATAG). 
 
•  Awareness of the inhabitants of Latvia of climate change 
 
Although the inhabitants of Latvia have had one of the lowest awareness of climate 
change as a global problem among the EU states, it is, however, increasing. More and more 
inhabitants of Latvia recognise that climate change is a very serious problem17. Convincing 
results have also been obtained in 2017 in the survey18 organised by Kantar TNS Latvia, 
resulting in a conclusion that 85 % of the inhabitants of Latvia (from 15 to 74 years of age) 
recognise that climate change is occurring and can be observed in Latvia. Moreover, the 
inhabitants have also become more socially active, the movement Fridays for Future Latvia has 
joined the global climate strike, organising several protests related to the green policy in which 
several hundreds of young persons19 had gathered, directing attention towards the need for more 
ambitious actions to achieve the goals of the Paris Agreement. 
Taking into account the amplification of the consequences caused by climate change, 
as well as the political settings of the EU, the awareness and interest of the inhabitants of Latvia 
in climate change mitigation will keep increasing. 
 
16 Position No. 2 of the Republic of Latvia of 11 June 2019. On Communication of the European Commission: A 
Clean Planet for all! A European strategic long-term vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate 
neutral economy 
17  Special  Eurobarameter  Report.  Climate  change,  2017.  Available  online: 
https://ec.europa.eu/clima/sites/clima/files/support/docs/report_2017_en.pdf 
18 Baltic Environmental Forum, Informētība un attieksme pret klimata pārmaiņām [Awareness and Attitude 
Towards  Climate  Change].  Results  of  the  survey  of  inhabitants  of  Latvia,  2016.  Available  online: 
http://www.bef.lv/fileadmin/Projektu_faili/SEG_emisijas/Petijums_SKDS_27_06_2016.pdf 
19 The climate walk of 15 March 2019 gathered 650 participants; approximately 250 persons joined the Baltic 
Climate Road campaign of 12 April at the Cabinet, and approximately 300 persons participated in the walk of 
24 May. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  15  
•  Development of green technologies make them more available and common 
 
In addition, extensive determination of policies for the promotion of LCD in the energy 
sector will create new working places in the energy sector, i.e., more extensive switch towards 
renewable energy sources will create more working places in the energy sector than working 
places that will be liquidated for the persons employed in the industry of fossil fuel, having an 
overall positive influence on economy at large by promoting a GDP increase20. 
Upon referring to that indicated in the report of the International Renewable Energy 
Agency, the Strategy assumes that energy transition will be based on a rapid price reduction for 
renewable energy sources, the prices for solar panels and wind energy will continue to decrease 
as it already can be seen. Also, in relation to the transport sector, it is assumed that in the future 
renewable  electricity,  developed  biofuels,  and  different  technologies  of  electrification, 
including electric cars, will dominate in the transport energy. 
In order to implement LCD, it will be necessary to stimulate significant additional 
investments within the scope of modernisation and decarbonization of the EU economy. Today 
around 2 % of the EU GDP is invested in the EU energy system and related infrastructure 
(except  for  the  investments  related  to  replacement  of  vehicles).  According  to  the  EU 
Communication, the EU would have to increase this amount to 2.8 % or around EUR 520–575 
billion per year in order to achieve a climate-neutral economy21. 
Transformation of energy (transition from fossil energy sources to renewable ones) is 
economically feasible because additional costs will be covered from savings from reduced air 
pollution, health improvements, lower damages in comparison with the situation where nothing 
is done to mitigate climate change. 
 
•  Failure to act in climate change mitigation causes economic losses and requires 
additional costs 
 
The environmental impact caused by climate change may have a significant impact on 
the productivity of the economy, infrastructure, public health, food availability, biological 
diversity, and political stability of Europe. The economic losses caused by disasters related to 
weather conditions in 2017 reached a record-high amount – EUR 283 billion.22 Currently such 
disasters directly affect 5 % of inhabitants of Europe, however, by 2100 their direct impact 
could be felt already by two thirds of Europeans.23 
The results of economic calculations show that, for instance, the annual increase of 
losses arising from damages to buildings caused by high tide in all towns alongside the sea 
coast in Latvia in the time period from 2040 to 2070 might be EUR 1.5 million per year, but in 
the time period from 2070 to 2100 it might reach EUR 3 million per year.24 
 
20 According to the Eurofound study, Energy scenario: Employment implications of the Paris Climate Agreement, 
Latvia has a very high potential for the increase of GDP upon implementation of the goals brought forward in the 
Paris Agreement. Available online:  
https://www.eurofound.europa.eu/sites/default/files/ef_publication/field_ef_document/fomeef18003en.pdf 
21 European Commission. In-depth analysis in support of the commission Communication COM(2018) 773. A 
Clean Planet for all A European long-term strategic vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate 
neutral economy, 2018. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies/2050_en 
22European Commission, Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the European 
Council, the Council, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions, and the 
European Investment Bank. A Clean Planet for all! A European strategic long-term vision for a prosperous, 
modern,  competitive  and  climate  neutral  economy,  2018.  Available  online:  https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2018:0773:FIN:LV:PDF 
23Ibid. 
24Centre of processes analysis and research. Risku un ievainojamības novērtējums un pielāgošanās pasākumu 
identificēšana Civilās aizsardzības un ārkārtas palīdzības jomā 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  16 In turn, the impact of increase in flood caused by rain and melting of snow under 
exposure to climate change on buildings in Latvia may cause annual economic losses in the 
amount of EUR 40–50 thousand (in the time period from 2020 to 2040) and around EUR 160–
210 thousand in the time period from 2070 to 2100. Due to the increase of overload caused by 
snow accumulation on roofs the projected economic danger in the nearest future (until 2040) is 
around EUR 90 thousand per year, but at the end of the century (in the time period from 2071 
to 2100) it will be around EUR 300–700 thousand per year. 
Upon evaluating the days of delay occurring due to the degradation of tracks, the annual 
late losses in the time period from 2040 to 2070 will be around EUR 0.2 million with an 
increase of EUR 0.1 million, but in the time period from 2070 to 2100 – EUR 0.4 million and 
EUR 0.3 million accordingly. Studies show that for Latvia additional annual financial loses will 
also be caused by increase in the damages caused by high tide to roads alongside the sea coast 
and in towns of river estuaries, increase of damages caused by downpour flood to roads 
(together with decrease in the freeze-up period of roads), increased melting of asphalt, and other 
damages to the road surface, increased bending of tracks, depreciation of materials, and 
instability of banks due to the heat, increase of damages caused by high tide to ports25. 
 
   
 
[Risk and Vulnerability Assessment and Identification of Adjustment Measures in the Field of Civil Protection 
and  Emergency  Assistance].  Available  online: 
http://petijumi.mk.gov.lv/sites/default/files/title_file/petijums_varam_2016_2017_risk_un_ievain_novert_un_pie
lag_pasak_identific_civilas_aizsardz_arkart_palidz_joma.pdf 
25Risku un ievainojamības novērtējums un pielāgošanās pasākumu identificēšana būvniecības un infrastruktūras 
jomā [Risk and Vulnerability Assessment and Identification of Adjustment Measures in the Field of Civil 
Protection and Emergency Assistance], final report, association Zaļā brīvība [Green Freedom], 2017. Available 
online: http://www.varam.gov.lv/lat/publ/petijumi/petijumi_klimata_parmainu_joma/?doc=23668 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  17 3. Linkage of the Strategy with Existing Legal Acts and Policy Planning 
Documents 
 
The need for the development of the Strategy has been specified in several international 
and EU level documents, and in terms of content it includes the competences included in the 
national intersectoral policy planning documents. 
 
•  International documents 
 
The Convention emphasises the need for the reduction of GHG emissions to reduce 
human impact on the climate system and to allow ecosystems to adapt to climate change. 
The Paris Agreement which was adopted by the Conference of the Parties to the 
Convention at its twenty-first session in Paris, France, prescribes that Parties to the Convention 
should formulate long-term low GHG emission development strategies26. 
In 2015, the UN General Assembly adopted the resolution Transforming our world: the 
2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development or Agenda 2030. 17 Sustainable Development 
Goals (SDG) are determined therein in order for poverty to be eradicated in the world and the 
global development to be sustainable. One of them is: “Take urgent action to combat climate 
change and its impacts.” 
 
•  Documents of the European Union 
 
The European Council invites the Council of the European Union and the European 
Commission in the conclusions of 20 June 201927 to advance work on the conditions, the 
incentives and the enabling framework to be put in place in order to ensure a transition to a 
climate-neutral EU that will preserve European competitiveness, be just and socially balanced, 
take account of Member States’ national circumstances and respect their right to decide on their 
own energy mix. The  conclusions of the Foreign  Affairs Council of  18 February 201928 
emphasize that climate change is a direct and existential threat the consequences of which the 
world is already witnessing, yet action to stem it remains insufficient. 
The EU has included the development of the Strategy in its policy documents according 
to the international documents. Article 4 of Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council29 already determined that EU Member States must prepare 
national low-carbon development strategies and report on the progress of development starting 
from 2015, in turn, the provisions of Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 are integrated in Regulation 
No 2018/1999, as well as it is specified that each EU Member State must prepare and submit 
its LCD strategy for 2050 to the European Commission by 1 January 2020. 
A significant aggregate of action policies at EU level is the Policy Framework for 
Climate and Energy from 2020 to 2030 which includes the joint objectives of the EU for 
reduction of GHG emissions and the objectives for the reduction of GHG emissions of Member 
States for sectors of the EU emissions trading scheme and non-ETS sectors30, as well as in the 
total  final  energy  consumption  of  RES,  and  the  energy  efficiency  objectives.  Upon 
 
26Article 4(19) of the Paris Agreement. 
27Conclusions  of  the  European  Council  of  20 June 2019.  Available  online: 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/39953/20-21-euco-final-conclusions-lv.pdf 
28Conclusions  of  the  Foreign  Affairs  Council  of  18 December 2019.  Available  online: 
http://data.consilium.europa.eu/doc/document/ST-6153-2019-INIT/en/pdf 
29Regulation (EU) No 525/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 May 2013 on a mechanism 
for monitoring and reporting greenhouse gas emissions and for reporting other information at national and Union 
level relevant to climate change and repealing Decision No 280/2004/EC. 
30Non-ETS – processes not included in the EU ETS, for instance, minor energy sector, industrial processes not 
included in the EU ETS (use of raw materials) and use of solvents and substances depleting the ozone layer 
(fluorinated gases), transport, agriculture, waste management. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  18 implementation  of the Strategy, Latvia should take into consideration the EU legal  acts 
approved within the scope of the PFCE package and the objectives specified for Latvia (for 
ETS sectors (joint for the EU) and for non-ETS sectors (individual for each EU Member State)). 
In addition thereto several aggregates (packages) of regulation have been developed in 
the EU, taking into consideration the LCD principles, for example, the Mobility Package31, the 
Circular Economy Package32, as well as the Action Plan for Sustainable Finance33, and Clean 
Energy for All Europeans34. 
 
•  National policy planning documents 
 
At national level, the Sustainable Development Strategy of Latvia until 2030, as well as 
other policy planning documents of Latvia, including sectoral planning (see Figure 2), also 
provide for comprehensive sustainable development which is based on low GHG emissions. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Policy planning documents supporting the Strategy 
 
 
31 Europe in movement: The Commission supplements its agenda in relation to safe and clean mobility that ensures 
connectivity.  https://ec.europa.eu/latvia/news/eiropa-kust%C4%ABb%C4%81-komisija-papildina-savu-darba-
k%C4%81rt%C4%ABbu-attiec%C4%ABb%C4%81-uz-dro%C5%A1u-t%C4%ABru-un_lv 
32  On  the  Circular  Economy  Package.  Available  online:https://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_MEMO-15-
6204_lv.htm Available online: 
33  Sustainable  finance:  Commission’s  Action  Plan  for  a greener  and  cleaner  economy.  Available  online: 
https://europa.eu/rapid/press-release_IP-18-1404_lv.htm 
34  Clean  energy  for  all  Europeans  –  Realization  of  the  growth  potential  of  Europe. 
https://ec.europa.eu/latvia/news/t%C4%ABra-ener%C4%A3ija-visiem-eiropas-iedz%C4%ABvot%C4%81jiem-
%E2%80%94-eiropas-izaugsmes-potenci%C4%81la-realiz%C4%93%C5%A1ana-0_lv  
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  19 As currently LCD directions are not sufficiently developed in the policy planning 
documents of national level of Latvia, as well as there is a lack of a unified action policy for 
the reduction of GHG emissions, the development directions for the promotion of LCD 
currently included in the policy planning documents of national level, as well as the planning 
documents of different sectors are compiled and supplemented in this Strategy.   
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  20 4. Current Progress of Latvia in Advancement Towards Climate Neutrality 
 
4.1. Structure and Dynamics of GHG Emissions (Excluding the LULUCF Sector) 
 
GHG emissions in Latvia mainly occur in such sectors of national economy as energy, 
transport, industrial processes and product use, agriculture and waste management (Figure 3). 
The land use, land-use change and forestry sector s described in Chapter 4.2 as both the 
generator of GHG emissions and the facilitator of CO  removals. 
2
 
Waste 
management, 5%
Agriculture, 25% Energy, 34%
Industrial processes 
and product use, 7%
Transport, 29%
 
 
Figure 3. Main sources of GHG emissions in 201735 (excluding LULUCF) 
 
Each of the sectors indicated in Figure 3 also includes more detailed sub-categories 
according  to  which  corresponding  economic  activities36  can  be  determined;  the  annual 
international reports on GHG emissions should be provided according to such division. 
According to the GHG inventory of Latvia37 submitted in 2019, the total emissions of 
Latvia in 2017 (without the LULUCF sector) were 11 325 kt CO eq. Therefore, the total GHG 
2
emissions of the State in the time period from 1990 to 2017, excluding the LULUCF sector, 
have decreased by approximately 57 %. The GHG projections of 2019 (hereinafter – the GHG 
projections) show that in 2050, excluding LULUCF, the potential GHG reduction could be 
68 %38 (in comparison with 1990). Only the current policy and measures are taken into 
consideration in the GHG projections for 2050, and the scenario only provides for the currently 
available commercial technologies. 
 
35GHG inventory of 2019, submitted within the scope of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Available online: 
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/transparency-and-reporting/reporting-and-review-under-the-
convention/greenhouse-gas-inventories-annex-i-parties/national-inventory-submissions-2019 
36 In order for the statistics of different countries to be comparable, there are two classification system in effect in 
Europe – the European System of Accounts 1995 (ESA 95) and the EU Statistical Classification of Economic 
Activities (NACE) – according to which institutional units and sectors of national economy can be classified. 
37GHG inventory of 2019, submitted within the scope of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Available online: 
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/transparency-and-reporting/reporting-and-review-under-the-
convention/greenhouse-gas-inventories-annex-i-parties/national-inventory-submissions-2019 
38GHG inventory of 2019, submitted within the scope of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, and expert 
evaluation. Available online: https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/transparency-and-reporting/reporting-and-
review-under-the-convention/greenhouse-gas-inventories-annex-i-parties/national-inventory-submissions-2019) 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  21 The energy sector39 is the largest source of GHG emissions and generated 34 % of the 
total emissions of 2017 (Figure 3). Emissions from the combustion processes in all sectors of 
national economy are accounted in the energy sector. The majority of emissions is generated 
by the energy sector (public generation of electricity and thermal energy – 40 %), followed by 
the commercial, institutional, household, agriculture, forestry, and fisheries sectors (39 %), the 
remaining part is formed by the manufacturing industry and construction, military transport, 
and diffuse emissions from oil and natural gas. In comparison with 1990, the amount of 
emissions has decreased in all sub-sectors of the energy sector, but the largest reduction is 
observed  in  the  manufacturing  industry  and  construction  (83 %),  as  well  as  in  service, 
household, agriculture, fisheries, and forestry sectors (74 %). Emissions of the energy sector 
are fluctuating depending on the economic changes in the country and the significantly different 
average temperatures of winter. An essential factor for the reduction of GHG emissions from 
the energy sector in the total balance sheet is energy efficiency, switching of the heating fuel 
from liquid and solid fuels to natural gas, as well as the replacement of fossil energy sources 
with biomass and other types of RES. Important factors for the switching of energy sources are 
their price and availability, as well as national policy and measures, including support measures. 
The total consumption of thermal energy in Latvia from 1990 has decreased. The largest 
decrease in consumption of thermal energy is attributable to the enterprises of industrial 
manufacturing40, partly attributable also to the energy efficiency measures implemented in 
households. The energy consumed in households forms up to 40 % of all energy balance, 
therefore, the sector of buildings holds a significant potential for achieving the joint energy 
efficiency objectives. 
Although the consumption of electricity has decreased in comparison with 1990, it keeps 
increasing in the time period from 2005. Changes can be explained by an improvement in the 
welfare and living standard of inhabitants, as well as by technological developments, as the 
number of electric and electronic appliances used in the service sector and households is 
increasing. 
The reduction in the amount of energy produced in the transformation sector can be 
explained by the increase of electricity produced by HPPs and VPPS. Electricity produced by 
HPPs in 2017 was 4 381 GWh, whereas the amount of electricity produced by VPPs in 2017 
was 150 GWh. Transformation sector mainly uses natural gas the share of which is gradually 
decreasing: in 2010 – 81.0 %, in 2016 – 60.1 %, and in 2017 – 53.7 %. Within five years, the 
share of RES consumed by the transformation sector has increased by 17.2 percentage points 
and exceeded 45.9 % in 2017. Electricity produced in biomass (woodfuel) cogeneration plants 
and power stations within the last five years increased from 215 to 525 GWh and in biogas 
cogeneration plants from 288 to 405 GWh. 
According to the projections, emissions from the energy sector in the current situation 
will decrease in 2050 by approximately 34 % when compared to 2017, and by 86 % when 
compared to 1990. 
 
39The energy sector includes sources of emissions with the NACE sectoral codes: 05, 06, 07.21, 08.92, 09.1, 19.20, 
35, 33, 36–39, 45–47, 52–96, 99, i.e., public electricity and production of thermal energy, production of solid fuel 
and other energy sectors, industrial sectors and construction, including manufacture of basic iron and steel, 
manufacture of non-ferrous metals, manufacture of chemical substances, manufacture of cellulose and paper, 
polygraphy, food processing, manufacture of beverages and tobacco, manufacture of non-ferrous minerals, 
manufacture, of wood and products of wood and cork (except for furniture), manufacture of articles of straw and 
plaiting materials, commercial and institutional sector, households, agriculture, forestry, fisheries, military 
transport, and diffuse emissions from oil and natural gas. 
40The consumption of thermal energy in industrial sectors in 2017 was only 11 % of the total consumption of 
thermal energy in the country. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  22 Transport41 is the second largest source of GHG emissions and generated 29 % of the 
total emissions in 2017. In comparison with 1990, the amount of emissions in the transport 
sector has increased by 9.4 %. 
The majority of GHG emissions from the transport sector in 2017 were generated from 
road transport (93.88 %), whereas the largest generator of emissions in the road transport sub-
sector according to the groups of vehicles was passenger cars followed by freight vehicles and 
buses. Railway generates only 5.5 % of the total transport sector emissions, maritime transport 
– 0.48 %, and aviation – 0.14 %. 
Although the number of motorised vehicles is lower than on average in OECD countries, 
as well as the number of inhabitants will most likely decrease in the future, it is projected that 
the number of motorised vehicles will increase in Latvia concurrently with the increase in the 
living standard of inhabitants, as well as increasing suburbanisation tendencies. According to 
the projections, it is anticipated that in 2050 transport sector emissions will decrease in total in 
relation to 2017 and 1990 (by 53 % and 47 % accordingly). 
Such emissions are accounted in the sector of industrial processes and product use42 
which are generated from industrial processes, use of raw materials in industrial production, 
use of chemical substances and use of heating fuel for non-energy needs. In 2017, 6.5 % of the 
total GHG emissions of Latvia were generated in this sector. Although the amount of emissions 
is relatively small, it has an increasing trend starting from 2009. In total, the largest amount of 
GHG emissions is generated from the manufacture of cement, glass, and bricks, forming 61 % 
of  the  total  industrial  process  emissions  in  2017.  Although  the  quantity  of  fluorinated 
greenhouse gases (fluorinated gases43) in the country and the amount of emissions therefrom 
are not high (in 2017 – 32 % of the total GHG emissions in the sector of industrial processes 
and product use and 2.1 % of the total GHG emissions of Latvia), they have a high global-
warming potential which exceeds the CO  global-warming potential even several thousand 
2
times. Emissions of fluorinated gases have significantly increased since 1995 as their use for 
the replacement of ozone-depleting substances was commenced. Use of fluorinated gases also 
increases in relation to the increasing demand for air conditioning equipment in premises and 
vehicles, as well as upon increase in welfare and living standard of inhabitants. Taking into 
account the foreseeable trend of industrial development, it is currently projected that increase 
of GHG emissions from industrial processes will continue, generating 9 % increase of GHG 
emissions in 2050 in comparison with 2017 and 22 % increase in comparison with 1990. 
Agriculture44 is the third largest source of GHG emissions, generating 24.6 % of the 
total GHG emissions of Latvia in 2017. The most significant GHG emissions in this sector are 
generated by cultivation of agricultural land (60.8 %) and farming (31.2 %). Since 1990, the 
amount of GHG emissions in the agriculture sector has decreased by 50.5 % mainly as a result 
of restructuration of national economy, decrease of the rate of production in rural farms, as well 
as division of large-scale farms into smaller farms. The quantity of emissions is significantly 
affected by fluctuations in the number of farm animals and the quantity of mineral nitrogen 
 
41The transport sector includes sources of emissions with the NACE sectoral codes:49, 50, 51, 52, 53, i.e., inland 
aviation, road transport, railway, inland shipping. 
42The sector of industrial processes and product use includes sources of emissions with the NACE sectoral codes: 
23, 24,27, 28, 35, 43, 45, i.e., manufacture of minerals (includes manufacture of cement, lime, glass, bricks, and 
ceramic tiles), chemical manufacture, manufacture of metals (includes manufacture of iron and steel), use of 
heating fuel for non-energy needs (includes use of lubricants, paraffin wax, urea, covering of roads with asphalt 
and tar coating of roofs), use of solvents, manufacture of electronics, products used for replacement of ozone-
depleting substances (includes use of fluorinated gases in cooling and air conditioning equipment, foam, fire safety 
articles, sprays, and solvents containing fluorinated gases), manufacture and use of other products (includes the 
use of sulphur hexafluoride in electric devices and the use of nitrogen oxide in medicine). 
43Fluorinated  greenhouse  gases  –  hydrofluorocarbons,  perfluorocarbons,  sulphur  hexafluoride,  and  other 
greenhouse gases containing fluorine or mixtures containing any of the abovementioned substances. 
44The agriculture sector includes sources of emissions with the NACE sectoral code: 0.1, i.e., emissions generated 
by farm animals (including fermentation in the alimentary tract, manure management), cultivation of agricultural 
soil, liming, and use of urea. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  23 fertilisers applied. Increase of emissions from the agriculture sector has been observed during 
the last years, mainly from cultivation of agricultural land, upon increase in the use of mineral 
fertilisers containing nitrogen. 
The main types of use of UAA are arable land, as well as grassland and pasture land. 
The majority of fields in Latvia (ha) are occupied by growing crops, green forage for fodder, as 
well as agro-industrial cropping. 
The largest amount of uncultivated UAA territories is in Pierīga and Eastern Latgale, 
the smallest – in Zemgale. In 2017, the total yield of crops in Latvia was 2.6 million tonnes 
which is 42 % more than ten years ago. The significant increase in the total yield of crops was 
mainly influenced by the increase in areas sown with crops. 
The total surface area under cultivation of agricultural crops treated with mineral 
fertilisers increased by 51 % in 2008, by 55 % in 2010, and 60 % of all surface areas under 
cultivation were fertilised in 2017. 
The  projections  show  that  emissions  from  the  agriculture  sector  will  increase. 
Respectively, in 2050 they will increase by 15 % in comparison with 2017 and by 43 % – with 
1990. 
The waste management sector45 generated approximately 5 % of the total emissions in 
2017. The majority of emissions occurred from waste disposal at landfills (71 %) and from 
wastewater (20 %), the remaining part – from composting and incineration of waste (8 %). In 
comparison with 1990, GHG emissions from the waste sector have decreased by 19.2 %. 
Fluctuations of emissions are observed in the sector which may be explained by changes in the 
economic situation in the country. 
The projections show that by 2050 GHG emissions from the waste management sector 
will reach a reduction of approximately 58 % when compared to 2017 and a reduction of 66 % 
when comparison with 1990. 
 
4.2. LULUCF Sector Net Emissions – Structure and Dynamics 
 
Unlike other sectors, the LULUCF sector generates not only GHG emissions, but also 
forms CO  removals (the carbon from the atmosphere is sequestrated in the living woody 
2
biomass as a result of photosynthesis process). The LULUCF sector includes six categories of 
land: forest land, cropland, grassland, settlements, wetlands, and other land. The scope of the 
Strategy applies to the whole LULUCF sector, not just individual categories. 
The total GHG balance is formed by the sum of GHG emissions of the abovementioned 
LULUCF sector categories. In the time period between 1990 and 2013, the total GHG emissions 
in the LULUCF sector were lower than CO  removals. However, starting from 2010 an increase 
2
of GHG emissions in the LULUCF sector has been observed, moreover, it is being projected 
henceforth (until 2050) that GHG emissions in the LULUCF sector will exceed removals. The 
largest changes in GHG emissions and CO  removals are in the category “Forest land” (see 
2
Figure 4). 
The main cause for the decline in CO  removals and increase in GHG emissions in the 
2
LULUCF sector is the increase in the proportion of stands that have attained or surpassed the 
falling age which has promoted increase in the amount of exploitation of the forest and increase 
in emissions related to the natural mortality of trees. Another significant factor is deforestation 
occurring upon construction of new infrastructure objects. In the last decades, the proportion of 
forest stands which have attained and surpassed the age of economic use has increased in the 
age structure of forest stands for all main tree species in Latvia, particularly in stands of 
deciduous trees. Carbon sequestration in the live biomass is slowing down and CO  emissions 
2
increase in such forest stands upon mineralisation of the carbon accumulated in the dead wood 
as a result of which GHG emissions may exceed carbon removals in biomass of woody plants. 
 
45The waste sector includes sources of emissions with the NACE sectoral code: 38, i.e., disposal of solid waste, 
biological treatment of solid waste, incineration of waste, purification and discharge of wastewater. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  24  
 
 
Figure 4. GHG emissions and removals of the LULUCF sector of Latvia (kt CO  eq.)46 
2
 
GHG emissions from cropland and grassland have been decreasing since 1990. The 
decrease in GHG emissions from cropland is mainly related to the mineralisation of organic 
soils, transformation of cropland into grassland, and afforestation. 
The largest amount of GHG emissions from grassland is forming in organic soil. 
Substantial CO  and N O emissions in organic soil from cropland and grassland is forming 
2 2
regardless of the method of management, whereas the carbon stock in mineral soil is increasing 
or decreasing as a result of changing the type of land use or the method of management. 
GHG emissions forming in the territories of peat extraction and emissions forming upon 
use of peat in horticulture are evaluated in the category of wetlands. According to the GHG 
inventory of 2019, emissions from wetlands in the time period from 1990 to 2017 have 
increased and GHG projections show an increase in GHG emissions also in the future the 
amount and area of peat extraction is projected to increase. 
 
4.3. Joint Progression of Latvia Towards Climate Neutrality 
 
The previous sub-chapters provides an overview of the current situation in relation to 
the first two objectives of the Strategy, applying to the reduction of GHG emissions (excluding 
the LULUCF sector) and the net emissions in the LULUCF sector only. However, as the 
objective of climate neutrality  includes the joint  performance of  all sectors, information 
 
46GHG inventory of 2019, submitted within the scope of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol, and expert 
evaluation.  The  GHG  objectives  reflected  include  both  ETS  and  non-ETS  emissions.  Available  online: 
https://unfccc.int/process-and-meetings/transparency-and-reporting/reporting-and-review-under-the-
convention/greenhouse-gas-inventories-annex-i-parties/national-inventory-submissions-2019;  the  report  on 
policies,  measures,  and  GHG  projections  submitted  to  the  EC  in  2017.  Available  online: 
https://cdr.eionet.europa.eu/lv/eu/mmr/art04-13-14_lcds_pams_projections/projections/envws0bea/. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  25 regarding the balance of the current annual net GHG emissions, as well as projections if only 
the measures provided for currently are to be implemented, including all sectors, also the 
LULUCF sector, is aggregated in this sub-chapter. 
The total GHG emissions of Latvia (including the LULUCF sector) in 2017 were 9 618 
kt CO  eq.47. The total GHG emissions of the country in the time period from 1990 to 2017 
2
have decreased by approximately 42 %. In 2050, the projected (only with the current policy and 
measures for the reduction of GHG emissions) reduction of GHG emissions is approximately 
17 %48 in comparison with 1990 (Figure 5). 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Total amount of GHG emissions of Latvia (until 2017) and projection (for 
2018–2050) under the scenario “with the current measures” (1990–2050)49 
 
In Figure 5, a vertical line separates information regarding the current situation from 
future projections. 
According  to  the  initial  indicative  projections50,  the  specified  quantity  of  GHG 
emissions which will have to be compensated with removals in 2050 is approximately 3.6 
million t CO  eq. 
2
   
 
47GHG inventory of 2019, submitted within the scope of the Convention and the Kyoto Protocol. Available online: 
https://unfccc.int/documents/194812 
48The report on policies, measures, and GHG projections submitted to the EC in 2019. Available online: 
https://cdr.eionet.europa.eu/lv/eu/mmr/art04-13-14_lcds_pams_projections/projections/envxk3aeq/  and  expert 
evaluation. 
49The report on policies, measures, and GHG projections submitted to the EC in 2019. Available online: 
https://cdr.eionet.europa.eu/lv/eu/mmr/art04-13-14_lcds_pams_projections/projections/envxk3aeq/  and  expert 
evaluation. 
50Initial evaluation of the study of the Institute of Physical Energetics Latvijas tautsaimniecības attīstības 
iespējamo scenāriju līdz 2050.gadam izstrāde atbilstoši Eiropas Savienības ilgtermiņa attīstības redzējumam 
[Drawing-up of the Potential Scenarios for the Development of National Economy of Latvia until 2050 according 
to the Long-term Development Vision of the European Union], November 2019.  
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  26 5. Most Significant Factors Affecting the Amount of Occurrence of GHG 
Emissions of Latvia in Different Sectors of National Economy 
 
The current structure of national economy of Latvia is characterised by the fact that non-
ETS emissions of Latvia form a very high share (approximately 80 % of the total emissions of 
the country). As the proportion of non-ETS on average in the EU countries forms 60 %, the 
proportion of non-ETS emissions in Latvia is the second highest among the EU countries. This 
means that in Latvia the share of such emissions for the reduction of which more active national 
policy and involvement is necessary as they are not regulated by EU ETS is significantly higher. 
 
5.1. Potential of Innovations 
 
The development of innovations is one of the priorities of the national economy which 
will ensure a more rapid growth of Latvian national economy and will be the basis for the 
increase in productivity and products with added value both in medium-term and in longer term. 
Currently, the level of the development of innovations in Latvia is low, however, growth 
caused by innovations in environmental development resulting from the initiative carried out in 
Latvia  has  been  observed,  particularly  by  supporting  enterprises  upon  introduction  of 
innovative goods and services, as well as upon acquisition of new manufacturing infrastructure. 
Latvia has been included in the group of countries of “moderate innovators” in the 
reports on the European innovation scoreboards and regional innovation scoreboards, holding 
the 24th place in the competition amongst 28 countries, retaining an invariable position in 
comparison with the results of the scoreboards of 2017 and 2018. However, the third highest 
growth in the EU has been observed in Latvia with an increase in the performance in the 
scoreboard51 by  17.7 percentage  points.  There  are  comparatively  low  investments  in  the 
research and development activities of the private sector, as well as a low number of new 
graduates of post-graduate studies in Latvia. 
 
5.2. Energy Sector 
 
Energy efficiency indicators of buildings, energy security in the context of the use of 
local energy sources are essential factors affecting GHG emissions. Also, upon implementing 
LCD in the energy sector, such challenges as non-deterioration of air quality in the use of solid 
biomass in local solutions of heat supply, the potential of the use of non-emission types of RES 
technologies, as well as the assessment of the introduction of new technologies in relation to 
carbon capture and storage should be taken into consideration. 
 
•  Energy efficiency in buildings 
 
In total, the fund of buildings52 in Latvia includes 1.37 million buildings with the total 
area of 204.7 million  m2 – in  residential  buildings (their area 45 %) and non-residential 
buildings, including manufacturing buildings (their area 55 %). 
The majority of the residential fund of Latvia surpasses the age of 25 years (only 10–
15 % of all residential buildings have been built during the last 10–15 years), moreover, the 
largest  proportion of inhabitants  are living  in  multiapartment  buildings with  low energy 
efficiency  (the  majority  of  buildings  not  restored  according  to  the  requirements  for  the 
classification of buildings currently conform to Classes E and F). Improvement of the energy 
 
51The European Innovation Scoreboard created by the European Commission includes 10 dimensions, taking into 
consideration 27 indicators affecting innovations in such areas as human resources, attractive research system, 
innovation-friendly environment, finance and support, firm investments, innovators, linkage between science and 
entrepreneurship, intellectual assets, impact of innovation on employment, and impact of innovation on sale. 
52 Data of the State Immovable Property Cadastre Information System provided by the State as of 1 January 2017. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  27 efficiency indicators of residential buildings will also reduce the poverty risk, for example, 
7.5 % of households were not provided with sufficient heat supply in 2018 (the indicator is 
twice higher than in other countries of the Northern Europe). 
In State buildings, the most significant consumption of thermal energy is observed in 
the security and social area, particularly in regions where a higher number of prisons and social 
institutions are amassed in comparison with other regions. 
Buildings that have been built before World War II are mainly located in the territory 
of urban construction monuments or also in the territory of architectural monuments, larger 
financial investments should be estimated for the implementation of energy efficiency measures 
in such buildings. 
 
•  Energy security 
 
The indicator of energy dependence of Latvia was approximately 89 % in 1990, but it 
already was significantly lower in 2017 – 43 %. 
The local energy sources ensuring the primary consumption of energy sources of Latvia 
are also concurrently RES – biomass (including wood and straws), water, wind, sun, gases from 
landfill sites and wastewater treatment facilities, biogas, as well as geothermal energy and 
hydrothermal energy, in turn, the energy resources imported – petroleum products, natural gas, 
coal – are fossil energy resources. Therefore, promotion of the use of RES will continue to 
reduce the dependence of Latvia on import of fossil energy resources, as well as increase the 
energy security of the country. 
 
•  Air quality aspect 
 
Since Latvia joined the EU, the use of solid biomass in combustion installations has 
increased significantly. Starting from 2012, the proportion of the use of biomass in total 
consumption surpasses the use of natural gas. Currently one of the main LCD providers of the 
energy sector is biomass – wood, timber residues, wood briquettes, chips, granules, as well as 
bioethanol, biodiesel fuel, gases from landfill sites and wastewater treatment facilities, and 
biogas. 
As increased air pollution has already been detected in individual zones of Riga, a 
challenge, particularly in urban environment, is caused by the use of such RES in local solutions 
of heat supply which do not have an adverse effect on air quality, for example, by using non-
emission technologies or fuel gas purification filters (particularly in relation to emissions of 
solid dispersed particles). 
 
•  Use of the types of non-emission RES technologies 
 
An additional solution for such challenge is an increase of the share of non-emission 
RES (sun, wind, water, geothermal energy, and hydrothermal energy). 
The share of manufacture and use of RES in electricity has an increasing trend – 54.58 % 
(in 2017), however, such RES as water or wind energy formed only 8.5 % of the consumption 
of total primary energy resources in 2017, but this share has increased (in comparison with 1990 
– by 5.2 %). 
Theoretical acquisition of hydroenergy resources from medium and small rivers of 
Latvia is 900 GWh of electricity per year. Hitherto the hydroenergy resources of small rivers 
were claimed only in the amount of 70 GWh which is 23 % to 28 % from the potential capacity 
of  past  watermills  and  former  small  HPPs.  Concurrently  it  should  also  be  taken  into 
consideration that claiming of the potential hydroenergy resources is permissible, only taking 
into account the objectives of environmental and nature protection, assessing and eliminating 
or reducing the potential negative impact on natural ecosystems, migrating fish, and biological 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  28 diversity. The quantity of the production of electricity in Latvia depends, to a large extent, on 
the flow of the River Daugava which depends on the precipitation volume in the relevant year. 
Cascade of the River Daugava – Riga HPP, Ķegums HPP, and Pļaviņas HPP – ensures on 
average 40 % of electricity consumed in Latvia. 
The division of energy resources from wind in Latvia is distinctly uneven. Such areas 
inside the territory of Latvia are favourable for wind energy where the wind develops as a result 
of an elevation. The highest wind speed in Latvia is at the coast of the Baltic Sea and at the 
western coast of the Gulf of Riga, its northern part. 
In 2017, approximately 330 MWh of electricity were generated from the sun which is 
almost 0.002 % of the total electricity supplied to end-users. 
Implementation of national level RES projects, for example, construction of wind parks 
or switching from fossil energy resources to RES in heat supply enterprises of the large cities, 
is particularly important. 
 
5.3. Transport 
 
As regards the GHG emissions in the transport sector, the structure of the vehicle fleet, 
the choice of cars, and the habits of their use are factors characteristic to Latvia. 
 
•  Structure of the existing vehicle fleet 
 
In Latvia, almost 80 % of the vehicles are older than ten years. 
In the time period from 2010 to 2017, the number of diesel cars has increased from one 
third to more than half of all vehicles. Heavy traffic in which fossil energy sources are the 
dominating fuel is generating not only GHG emissions, but also has a negative impact on air 
quality, particularly in urban environment where increased concentration of NO  is an indicator 
2
attesting to pollution caused by vehicles. Although the new cars registered in Latvia generate 
less emissions, Latvia still is in the second place in the EU in relation to the use of most carbon-
intensive cars. 
During the last years a trend has been observed that carriage of passengers in public 
transport has decreased and people choose their personal vehicles instead. 
 
•  Availability of the infrastructure for the refuelling of alternative vehicles 
 
The first stage of public fast charging network of national scale in Latvia was completed 
in 2018 and the second stage is planned in 2020. In total, it is planned53 to install 150 fast 
charging stations for electric vehicles by the end of 2021, installing them on regional roads 
connecting TEN-T roads and in populated areas where the number of inhabitants exceeds 5000. 
There was no passenger vehicle using hydrogen as fuel registered in Latvia (as of 2019), 
as well as there are no public hydrogen filling sites accessible in Latvia. 
One CNG filling station (in Jēkabpils) accessible to the public has been opened (in 
2019), and another two stations are planned to be opened in Riga. Biomethane can be introduced 
in the CNG infrastructure instead of natural gas. 
 
•  Choice of cars and habits of their use 
 
GHG emissions can also be reduced by choosing a type of car which is appropriate for 
the planned type of use, for example, by not choosing cars with large engine capacity (cross-
country vehicle) for driving in urban environment. In addition, GHG emissions and emissions 
of polluting substances in air occur due to the chosen driving style and also due to incomplete 
 
53Within the scope of the project co-financed by ERAF. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  29 technical maintenance of vehicles (for example, whether the exhaust pipe has been equipped 
with a diesel particulate filter and whether it is being appropriately maintained and operated). 
 
5.4. Agriculture and Land Use 
 
Significant factors in the land and land use, land-use change and forestry sector in 
relation to GHG emissions and CO  removals are the use of mineral fertilisers, high proportion 
2
of organic soil in the territory of Latvia, as well as forestry coverage. 
 
•  Use of mineral nitrogen fertilisers in treatment of agricultural land 
 
The total surface area under cultivation of agricultural crops treated with mineral 
fertilisers keeps increasing (in 2008 – 51 %, in 2010 – 55 %, and in 2017 – 60 % of all surface 
areas under cultivation were fertilised). In the last decade mineral fertilisation per 1 ha of areas 
under cultivation for all agricultural crops (recalculating in 100 % plant-based nutrients) has 
increased from 74 kg/ha to 110 kg/ha. The elementary nitrogenous fertilisers are still being used 
extensively as their prices are significantly lower than the prices of complex mineral fertilisers. 
The largest amount of mineral fertilisers per ha of area under cultivation was used for areas 
under cultivation for agro-industrial crops and cereal crops, but significantly less – in growing 
of open-field vegetables and potatoes. 
 
•  Soil structure/composition – organic soils 
 
Organic soils have formed in Latvia mainly in soils with high level of humidity. Upon 
transforming wetland containing a thick layer of organic matter into utilised agricultural area, 
emissions of dinitrogen oxide (N O) increase under the influence of increase mineralisation of 
2
soil. 
Such soil is found in smaller areas throughout the territory of Latvia and, to a larger or 
lesser effect, affects 48 % of households. In total, the quality assessment of organic soil in points 
is lower than on average in the country, thus affecting the indicators of productivity. 1 ha of 
unused organic soil to be used in agriculture generates as much GHG emissions as currently on 
average 10 ha of mineral soil producing agricultural products54. 
 
•  Forest area 
 
In comparison with the first half of the 20th century when 23 % of Latvia were covered 
in forests, this coverage has doubled over time until nowadays55 and reaches almost 53 % 
(covers 92 % of the total forest land56, 3 575 thousand ha from which forest area without 
restrictions of economic activity – 2 193 thousand ha). It is projected that the forest area will 
keep increasing because natural overgrowing of land not utilised in agriculture, as well as its 
reafforestation is continuing. According to the current estimates, the annual total forest growth 
is approximately 26 million m3 per year. The cleared area in the last decade from 2007 to 2017 
has decreased from 138 thousand ha to 94 thousand ha. 
Wood resources in Latvia are acquired in order to produce and export different wood 
products (wood and its articles, wood furniture, structural timber products, paper and cardboard 
articles), in turn, wood by-products from wood processing and forestry processes are used as 
an energy source. 
 
 
54INTERREG EUROPE has the results of the BIO4ECO project of the interregional cooperation programme. 
55Data of the National Forest Monitoring 2018. 
56Also part of wetland (for example, a swamp with trees reaching the height of at least 5 m) and shrub land or 
heathland is considered forest land. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  30 5.5. Use of Resources 
 
Essential factors in relation to the use of resources are the potential of bioeconomy, the 
efficiency of the use of resources, the consumption habits of households, the use of industrial 
raw materials of manufacturing, as well as waste management. 
 
•  Development of the potential of bioeconomy 
 
Bioeconomy  ensures  integrated  approach  towards  inclusion  of  knowledge-based 
economic growth, social welfare, and environmental protection into agriculture, forestry, and 
fisheries, conforming to the basic principles of circular economy, more efficient use of natural 
resources. Some of the potential directions of the development of bioeconomy are reduction of 
the amount of waste in processing and replacement of fossil resources with bioresources, inter 
alia the use of biodegradable materials. Economy of Latvia depends, to a large extent, on non-
renewable  fossil  resources  and  it  affects  not  only  the  economic  aspect,  but  also  the 
environmental and national security aspects. 
One of the principles in the development of sectors of bioeconomy is decoupling of 
manufacturing and GHG emissions in long-term (GHG emissions per unit of production 
manufactured decrease). Long-term actions for the optimisation of GHG emissions and CO  
2
removals in the future is of significance in forest management. 
Latvia is rich in wood resources. Wood production is one of the categories of the 
LULUCF sector which sequestrates CO  emissions. Concurrently with striving for climate 
2
neutrality, the fulfilment of bioeconomy objectives can be promoted and achieved, for example, 
by developing the use of wood resources for the manufacturing of products with high added 
value, including for export needs. 
 
•  Consumption habits of households 
 
Consumption habits of households promote increase of GHG emissions to a large extent 
because, with the improvement of economic welfare, the demands of inhabitants for comfort 
also increases. Upon continuing the implementation of conventional economic development 
(i.e.,  without  conforming  to  the  LCD  principles  and  striving  for  climate  neutrality),  the 
consumption  of  energy  resources,  the  amount  of  fluorinated  gases  which  are  used  as  a 
refrigerant in cooling and air conditioning equipment, as well as the amount of waste generated 
will also increase concurrently with increase in economic welfare of inhabitants. 
 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  31  
 
Figure 6. Consumption of inland resources57 (in total) in Latvia58, thous. t 
 
The consumption level of households experienced the most rapid increase after joining 
the EU in 2004, reaching the highest level in 2008. Increase of consumption expenses was 
discontinued by the economic crisis when economic resources of households rapidly decreased 
in 2009 and 2010. Starting from 2011, consumption expenses gradually increased again, and it 
was related to both increase in the level of income of inhabitants and rapid increase in the level 
of consumer prices. 
 Not only the amount of consumption expenses is increasing, but also their structure is 
changing, gradually approaching the structure in countries with a higher living standard. This 
has been largely promoted by both the increase in remuneration and the extensive offer of 
leasing goods and credit resources as a result of which many households undertook credit 
liabilities for the purchase of consumer goods and services. 
 
•  Efficiency of the use of resources 
 
The amount of manufacturing in the manufacturing industry have increased since the 
second half of 2009. Upon restoration of economic growth, the increase rates of manufacturing 
industry have become more rapid than the growth of joint national economy and currently it is 
the main driver of growth of national economy. 
The increasing consumption of materials is affecting climate change, mainly via the 
increasing energy consumption which is necessary for the acquisition, use, transportation, and 
storage of such materials. Concurrently the amount of material resources and raw materials 
available keeps decreasing and becomes increasingly expensive. In turn, manufacturing and 
everyday life generates increasingly more waste the management of which requires more and 
more investments. 
Trends of increase in consumption of materials are also observed in Latvia, and they are 
closely related to the indicators of economic welfare. Also the total flow of resources entering 
national economy – domestic consumption (see Figure 6) formed not only by the resources 
acquired inland (except for export), but also by imported resources (their amount is fluctuating 
in the amount of approximately 10 % in the total flow) – has increased 
 
 
57Materials/carriers of fossil energy – coal, lignite (brown coal), hard coal, oil shale and bituminous sand, peat, oil, 
and natural gas. 
Non-metallic mineral products – marble, granite, sandstone, porphyry, basalt, other ornamental or construction 
rocks (except for slate), chalk and dolomite, slate, chemical mineral products and mineral fertilisers, salt, limestone 
and gypsum, clay and kaolin, sand and gravel, and other non-metallic mineral products not elsewhere classified. 
Biomass and biomass products (here) – cultivated species, residues of cultivated species (used), wood and wood 
products, fishing and other water animals, other animals and animal products (meat, milk, eggs, honey). 
58Databases of the Central Statistical Bureau. Accounts of material flow – indicators (thous. of tons). Available 
online: https://data1.csb.gov.lv/pxweb/lv/vide/vide__vide__ikgad/VIG100.px/chart/chartViewLine/ 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  32 •  Use of raw materials of industrial manufacturing 
 
The number of large industrial manufacturing enterprises is relatively small in Latvia. 
Large part of GHG emissions in the balance of Latvia is formed by incineration or 
melting of raw materials that are rich in carbon (carbonates) in the manufacture of cement, 
limestone, brick, steel, and glass products. Such local raw materials as dolomite, limestone, or 
clay from incineration of which the necessary industrial production is obtained are used in the 
manufacturing of such products. Metal scrap and carburizers (raw materials of carbonate origin 
for improving the quality of metal articles) are also used in manufacturing of steel products for 
the enrichment of final products with carbon. 
Part of Latvian enterprises which are using carbonates in their manufacturing have 
changed the technologies and raw materials used to more energy- and emission-efficient 
technologies, thus providing their contribution to advancement towards climate neutrality. 
Latvia holds one of the last places in the whole space of the EU economy according to 
its manufacturing efficiency indicators both in the primary production of agriculture and fish 
and in the subsequent processing chain until the product reaches the final consumer. 
Decrease in the use of resources the use of which generates GHG emissions in the last 
decades has occurred because of the very discontinuation of industrial manufacturing. 
 
•  Introduction of technologies for the storage and use of CO  emissions 
2
 
Upon advancing towards complete decarbonisation it is possible to develop carbon 
capture and storage (CCS), as well as carbon capture and utilisation (CCU) technologies in the 
future in addition to natural carbon capture systems and storage systems in the manufacturing 
sector (particularly in the sectors of manufacturing cement and chemical substances where 
direct methods for the reduction of emissions are not available or it is not possible to replace 
fossil energy resources due to special features of technologies). 
Hitherto,  upon  determining  the  potential  geological  storage  sites  in  Latvia  and 
modelling prices, it was concluded that the efficiency of the creation of CO  storage sites (CCS) 
2
is too low and such solution would not be economically feasible at the moment. However, it is 
necessary  to  continue  the  research  of  the  suitability  and  economic  feasibility  of  CCS 
technologies in different industrial processes. 
In turn, CCU technologies provide for the processing of the captured carbon for further 
use, for example, in manufacture of plastic, concrete, or fuel. The CCU potential in reduction 
of carbon should be evaluated throughout the life cycle. 
 
•  Consumption of chemical substances and freezing agents 
 
Although the quantity of freezing agents (fluorinated gases) in the country and the 
amount of GHG emissions is not large, these gases have a very high global-warming potential. 
Upon increase in the living standard and welfare of inhabitants, as well as upon increase 
of the significance of the service sector in the State economy (particularly for wholesale trade 
and retail trade), it is foreseeable that the consumption of freezing agents will also increase (the 
household consumption tendencies show that the number of refrigerators, air conditioners, as 
well as private cars undergoes a stable increase in households). 
 
•  Waste management 
 
Waste generation is closely linked to the scale of consumption. The waste management 
policy should be viewed only in context of resource-efficiency and circular economy because 
the preclusion of materials from turning into waste (achieving the status of waste) will preclude 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  33 the necessity to consume new resources. Therefore, waste is not just an environmental problem, 
but also a loss for economy. 
Each inhabitant of Latvia generated on average 438 kg of household waste in 2017 
which is by 49 kg less than generated on average by an EU-28 inhabitant. However, the average 
quantity of household waste generated in comparison with 1995 per inhabitant in Latvia has 
increased by 65.7 % which is the largest increase in the EU in this period of time. The amount 
of the disposed household waste has a stable tendency to decrease as the amount of processed 
waste increases. 
 
5.6. Role of Local Governments and the Urban Environment 
 
Local  governments,  upon  fulfilling  the  duties  laid  down  in  the  current  laws  and 
regulations, have a key role in advancement of the country towards climate neutrality. The 
majority (68 % in 2018) of inhabitants in Latvia live in cities, however, an even larger 
proportion of inhabitants work in cities. 
 
•  City as “superconsumer” 
 
As cities are characterised by a higher density of inhabitants and higher economic 
activity, inhabitants of cities are also the largest consumers – the majority of transport is used 
in cities, the majority of energy is consumed in cities, the majority of goods and services are 
purchased and/or consumed in cities, also the majority of waste is generated in cities. 
 
•  Local governments include all inhabitants and the current functions of local 
governments include a significant potential for the achievement of climate 
neutrality 
 
Local governments have a high potential for influencing the contribution of the energy 
sector and transport sector to climate change mitigation because the autonomous functions 
specified for local governments already include such duties as management of heat supply, 
water supply, sewerage, and household waste, organisation of the public transport, spatial 
development planning, and determination of the procedures for land use and building, as well 
as lighting of the territories provided for public use, arrangement and maintaining of green 
zones. 
The role of local governments as energy consumers is related to the management of 
local government buildings and provision of public utility services (lighting of streets, water 
supply,  sewerage,  etc.).  In  relation  to  the  transport  sector,  local  governments  carry  out 
coordination and provision of the public transport, service vehicles, public services. Local 
governments  develop  spatial  development  planning  documents,  including  the  sustainable 
development strategy, spatial plan, development programme. Within the scope of spatial 
planning the local government is planning the infrastructure of the building territory, public 
outdoor spaces, and transport, including street and road network, sidewalks and pathways, 
bicycle lanes. Measures promoting improvement of the level of awareness of inhabitants, as 
well as involvement of the society in the development of the energy and climate policy and 
continuous informing of inhabitants of the objectives to be achieved and the progress attained 
in achievement thereof are activities creating a motivating impact. 
 
•  Level of local governments – significant for measures for the promotion of 
renewable energy sources 
 
Decisions made at the level of local governments can influence all sectors of final energy 
consumption, including ensure the most direct link with individual households which is one of 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  34 the largest priority target groups in achievement of energy efficiency and climate objectives. 
Issues of heat supply and electricity supply are topical for every household. The level of local 
governments is the very level where local challenges and specific nature, for example, the 
public sentiments, can be taken into consideration in the best way possible and it is possible to 
choose the most suitable ways and strategy for problem-solving and to promote the reduction 
of GHG emissions in an integrated manner. 
 
•  Urban environment – most subject to the risks of climate change 
 
The urban environment is more subject to the risks of climate change than rural areas. 
Cities are more often subject to such risks of climate change as flood, sea-level rise, heat waves, 
insufficiency of drinking water, drought, extreme precipitation, and storms.59 
 
•  Cooperation between local governments 
 
Such  cooperation  between  local  governments  which  is  offered  by  different  local 
(national) and international initiatives based on the concept “local governments learn from local 
governments”, for example, Covenant of Mayors for Climate & Energy, is essential. This 
initiative was commenced 10 years ago and has turned out to be successful. It is rapidly 
expanding both geographically (it is not only within the scope of the EU anymore) and also 
topically  (initially  was  oriented  towards  the  development  of  energy  strategies  of  local 
governments, however, over time the concept of adaptation to climate change, as well as the 
concept of a compact city has been added). 
   
 
59European Commission. In-depth analysis in support of the commission Communication COM(2018) 773. A 
Clean Planet for all A European long-term strategic vision for a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate 
neutral economy, 2018. Available online: https://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/strategies/2050_en 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  35 6. Potential Solutions for Ensuring Low Carbon Development 
 
Below a vision as to what development will have occurred in each sector in Latvia in 
2050  is  provided.  In  order  to  include  fields  and  sectors  where  changes  and  significant 
improvements can potentially be made in order to achieve climate neutrality and sustainable 
sectoral development, the Strategy provides for the following division – energy, transport, land 
management,  consumption,  and  manufacturing.  In  turn,  research  and  innovations, 
comprehensive energy efficiency and solutions for local governments and urban environment 
are general and provide for horizontal inclusion in all sectors of national economy. 
 
6.1. Research and Innovations in Low Carbon Technologies 
 
The development of research and innovations has provided a significant contribution to 
the implementation of the Strategy. The necessary funding has been mobilised, a stable, 
globally competitive human capital employed in research has been established, including a 
system for knowledge and technology transfer to all sectors of national economy has been 
developed. The LCD principles are being integrated into all studies, particularly in relation to 
the development of new technologies. 
Ambitious objectives have been brought forward for the promotion of innovations and 
extensive intersectoral cooperation is taking place, solutions existing in one sector can serve for 
the development of another sector. 
Research and LCD initiatives are able to attract large investments from the private 
sector. 
 
•  Principles of low carbon development are integrated into all State-funded 
studies 
 
Stable  funding  for  studies,  for  the  search  and  commercialisation  of  low  carbon 
technological  solutions  is  being  ensured  to  achieve  climate  neutrality  in  Latvia.  Upon 
implementing studies, the joint knowledge base of Latvia is being enriched, knowledge-
intensive, innovative goods and services with high added value and export potential are being 
created. All sectors of national economy are proactively participating in and providing a 
contribution to the search for the most efficient solutions for the reduction of GHG emissions 
and energy consumption, as well as increasing the efficiency. State programmes for support to 
research provide for the defining of advancement of research development in priority sectors 
with the potential benefit in relation to achieving climate neutrality. Innovative ideas for 
increasing the use of new, alternative materials and technologies for the consumption of 
resources are being developed, working places are being created, goods and services with 
higher  economic,  ecological,  and  social  added  value  are  being  created,  ensuring  the 
achievement of objectives of the Strategy as soon as possible. 
 
•  Investments are being successfully attracted for the development of research 
and innovation, for the development of new and improved technologies and 
processes 
 
Sufficient funding is ensured not only from the State budget, but also external funding 
from the EU and another international scope for studies and scientific development, as well as 
private funding is being regularly attracted and efficiently utilised. Action policy measures of 
different sectors for the development of research and innovation are mutually integrated. 
Representatives of Latvia are active and trustworthy cooperation partners in international 
consortia and regularly participate, with excellent results, in implementation of programmes of 
different international studies. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  36 Latvia has a high potential and mechanisms for the commercialisation of research results 
– innovative ideas, methods, and technologies which promote the implementation of objectives 
of the Strategy, are being tested and put into practice already at an early development phase 
thereof, promoting the manufacturing of sustainable products and technologies that can be 
exported, developing internationally competitive services. 
 
•  High level of commercialisation and competitiveness of research results is 
attained 
 
After researching the technology market and assessing market perspectives, research 
and innovations are developed in prospective niches and results are commercialised to a wide 
extent and reach the market, stimulating rise in productivity in all sectors of national economy, 
concurrently providing a contribution to reduction of the amount of GHG emissions. Business 
incubators which promote achievement of the  objectives of the Strategy are particularly 
supported. 
Enterprises of Latvia have adapted to the trends of the world market and are successfully 
operating in niches of the development and manufacturing of technologies, ensuring stable 
increase in export volume. 
 
•  Improvements  in  resource  efficiency  provide  an  opportunity  for  growth 
through eco-innovations and green working places 
 
More efficient use of resources and reduction of pollution is a significant driving force 
for economic growth. 
LCD also provides an opportunity for new directions of economic development as it 
potentially allows to create new sectors of employment engaged in introduction and servicing 
of environmentally friendly technologies (the so called green working places). 
Enterprises of Latvia are successfully using the opportunities provided by globalisation 
on the market of green technologies and innovations. 
 
•  Well-developed  research  human  capital,  culture  of  shared  use  of  the 
infrastructure and cooperation 
 
Stable and globally competitive research human capital with sufficient capacity and 
competitive  remuneration  is  established.  The  infrastructure  of  research  and  innovations, 
including  a  network  of  laboratories  with  modern  equipment  for  the  implementation  of 
technologically oriented projects, and mechanisms for the shared use thereof at national and 
international scale are well developed. Scientific institutions (higher education institutions and 
scientific institutes) are operating as centres for the creation of new ideas and knowledge and 
centres for the transfer of knowledge, skills, and competencies. At the same time, scientific 
institutions offer access to the infrastructure of research and innovations in the form of different 
research, technical, or advisory services. 
Research objectives of scientific institutions, State administration, and local government 
authorities and the sector of entrepreneurship are coordinated among them and are being 
implemented in close cooperation between all parties, including the society. Cooperation in 
research and innovation is developed on the scale of Latvia, the Baltic States, and the countries 
of the Baltic Sea Region. 
The  contribution  of  research  and  innovation  to  achieving  the  objectives  for  the 
development  of  action  policies,  the  society,  and  the  joint  objectives  for  the  national 
development  of  Latvia  in  all  sectors  of  national  economy  is  mutually  integrated  and 
supplementary. Strong technology transfer centres are forming in research and development, 
promoting communication and stimulating joint investments and investments of the private 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  37 sector  into  research  and  development.  The  system  for  the  transfer  of  knowledge  and 
technologies which promotes the commercialisation of the results of both public and private 
research is well developed. 
The State provides a significant contribution to the development of the skills and 
competencies of inhabitants for work with innovative technologies and ability to adapt to the 
requirements of the labour market and social environment. Introduction of and support to new 
technologies is paired with renewal and adjustment of the content of learning materials to the 
current situation. 
Scientific organisations are working in close cooperation with the industry, the demand 
of the industry for studies and services of scientific organisations is high. The possibilities for 
mutual cooperation by forming clusters, as well as possibilities for industrial symbiosis among 
manufacturing enterprises are being researched. 
 
•  Extensive and conveniently accessible base of practically applicable knowledge 
which promotes reduction of GHG emissions and ensures CO  removals is 
2
created 
 
Open science platforms which ensure open access both to the research data and results 
that can be used for the promotion and development of studies and innovations and monitoring 
of their success, as well as for the development of action policies and in political decision-
making process have been established and are operating efficiently. Information and data are 
easy to find, view, are mutually compatible and usable. A convenient database or several 
mutually  coordinated  databases  with  regular  synchronisation,  updating,  and  exchange  of 
information have been established where information regarding good practice in introduction 
of technologies, studies, methods, and other valuable information is being aggregated. The 
information and skills acquired are successfully transferred to sectors of national economy. The 
research and innovation results (goods, services, novelties and methods of processes) are 
quickly and efficiently made popular in the society and absorption of the new knowledge and 
technologies is being promoted. 
 
6.2. Comprehensive Energy Efficiency 
 
Increasing of energy efficiency and implementation of the horizontal principle “energy 
efficiency first” is one of the main factors of sustainable energy sector in Latvia as it reduces 
the demand for energy generation in different sectors of national economy, as well as in 
households. 
Taking into consideration that one of the largest final energy consumers in Latvia is 
households,  the  most  significant  energy  savings  can  be  achieved  in  this  very  sector  by 
improving  energy  efficiency  of  existing  buildings,  introducing  new,  stronger  technical 
requirements for the construction of new buildings, and using energy-efficient equipment. 
One of the solutions applied is energy marking (visual method for informing the public) 
and ecodesign (development of goods and services, taking into consideration their sustainability 
and reduction of environmental impact). The conditions for energy marking and ecodesign limit 
the manufacturing and placing on the market of products and equipment that are not energy 
efficient. 
 
•  Principle  “energy  efficiency  first”  is  introduced  and  implemented 
comprehensively 
 
Before planning the sectoral development of national economy, determining policies, 
and approving decisions on investments, evaluation whether the most efficient alternative for 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  38 the implementation of the particular policy which will bring the highest savings of final energy 
consumption has been selected is made. 
The principle “energy efficiency first” is also being applied in the conditions for using 
the funding from the EU and public funds. 
 
•  Construction of all new buildings conforms to the requirements for zero60 
energy consumption buildings 
 
Awareness of inhabitants regarding advantages of zero energy consumption buildings 
in terms of both energy savings and ensuring favourable microclimate of the interior premises 
has been raised. 
Strict energy efficiency requirements are being applied in the construction of new 
buildings. It has been ensured until 2050 that all new buildings are constructed as zero energy 
consumption buildings. 
In construction of zero energy consumption buildings attention is also paid to planning 
in relation to the placement of the buildings, the materials used, and internal engineering 
networks of the building. 
 
•  Renovation and reconstruction of all buildings conforms to the requirements 
of zero energy consumption or almost zero energy consumption 
 
Reduction of emissions cannot happen without improvements in energy efficiency of 
existing  buildings,  concurrently  also  retaining  the  historic  values.  Renovation  and 
reconstruction of buildings is carried out in good quality, using sustainable materials and 
efficient technologies and methods. All existing buildings are renovated or reconstructed 
according to the energy efficiency standards. As limited funding is one of the major current 
challenges for comprehensive restoration of buildings, additional financial instruments have 
been found (for example, see Chapter 7.2). 
 
•  Manufacturing processes are energy efficient 
 
Energy-efficient  and  resource-efficient  manufacturing  processes  ensure  the 
competitiveness of Latvia in the world, offering goods and services for competitive prices, 
concurrently creating additional work places and promoting growth. 
 
•  Only  energy-efficient  and  resource-efficient  products  and  equipment  are 
available to the society 
 
Upon designing products and equipment, it is being taken into account that as less 
energy as possible would be used in the manufacture of products and equipment, as well as 
energy of another type would be obtained from the manufacturing process. Ecodesign is widely 
conformed to and developed, it promotes introduction of innovative and sustainable solutions. 
According to the ecodesign requirements, products provide for convenient and efficient 
utilisation thereof which is accessible to everyone. The system is sustainable and conforms to 
the principles of circular economy. 
The field of energy-efficient lighting is dominated by systems and solutions of a new 
generation which can be managed from distance, have a long term of service and high efficiency 
in consumption of resources – during both the product development and the use thereof. 
 
60In accordance with Paragraph 8 of and Table 1 of Annex to Cabinet Regulation No. 280, Regulations Regarding 
the Latvian Construction Standard LBN 002-19 “Heat Engineering of Divisions of Buildings” all new buildings 
must conform to the requirements of almost zero energy consumption from 2021. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  39 Control and adaptation of energy consumption to particular needs is a service available 
to everyone and it is implemented from distance, using information  and communication 
technologies. 
 
6.3. Sustainable Energy 
 
According to the initial indicative projections61 the total consumption of primary energy 
in Latvia in 2050 will be approximately 118 PJ. 
Integration of RES and energy efficiency are the main fields for the achievement of the 
set objectives and undisturbed operation of internal market. Creation of suitable infrastructure 
ensures competitiveness, sustainability, and security of energy supply. Fossil energy sources 
have been replaced with renewable energy sources. In order to reduce emissions from the 
energy sector, a policy promoting sustainable and low carbon technology, including the use of 
RES,  and  introducing  the  most  efficient  technologies  available  on  the  market  has  been 
introduced.  LCD  is  topical  not  only  for  climate  change  mitigation  and  environmental 
conservation, but also for diversification of energy sources and promotion of energy security. 
Low carbon technologies reduce the negative impact of price fluctuations of petroleum and gas 
products on economy and allow the development of green employment. 
 
•  Use of renewable energy sources in the energy sector 
 
The  share  of  fossil  energy  sources  has  decreased  to  the  minimum  (as  low  as 
technologically possible) and the use of technologies with renewable and innovative energy 
sources has developed at an increasing rate. 
The use of RES in the energy sector has been promoted by supporting the obtaining of 
solar  and  wind  energy.  The  most  significant  types  of  RES  in  Latvia  are  solar  energy, 
hydroenergy, wind energy, and biomass, however, a significant amount of energy is also 
obtained from geothermal/hydrothermal energy. Upon increase in investments into innovative 
energy sources which reduce GHG emissions and the load on the environment at large, it is 
foreseeable that the use of RES in the energy sector will increase and they will replace fossil 
energy sources by 2050. 
Sufficiently extensive use of liquid biological heating fuel in energy generation and use 
of bio-oils in equipment in the agricultural and forestry sectors is ensured. Such raw materials 
as residues of felling areas, wood residues, and straw, but not specially grown energy cultures 
are being used for the generation of such energy sources, first-generation biofuel is not being 
manufactured. 
Solutions for concurrent use of several RES technologies have an essential role where, 
for example, electricity generated from RES is used for the ensuring of generation of thermal 
energy by RES technologies. 
Hydrogen as energy carrier which has been manufactured using electricity obtained 
from different types of RES, different solutions for the storage of hydrogen, has an increasingly 
important role. 
New technologies and  methods for heat  supply systems  which ensure the use of 
innovative technologies and solutions for efficient operation of the heat supply system have 
been introduced in the centralised and local heat supply system. Private residences are mainly 
self-sufficient  in  terms  of  energy  because  decentralised  zero-emission  heat  supply  and 
electricity supply solutions are being used. 
 
 
61Initial evaluation of the study of the Institute of Physical Energetics Latvijas tautsaimniecības attīstības 
iespējamo scenāriju līdz 2050.gadam izstrāde atbilstoši Eiropas Savienības ilgtermiņa attīstības redzējumam 
[Drawing-up of the Potential Scenarios for the Development of National Economy of Latvia until 2050 according 
to the Long-term Development Vision of the European Union], November 2019.  
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  40 •  Completely connected energy market that is freely accessible to everyone 
 
Within the scope of progressing towards the Energy Union, the EU has paid more 
attention to integration of the countries into a joint energy network which allows to optimise 
the generation, supply, and use of energy, as well as increases the security and stability of 
energy. 
Safe, flexible, efficient, and integrated approach to energy networks has been ensured, 
providing users with free access to energy generated from RES. 
Biomass and other RES, including geothermal energy, ensure stability in the energy 
market and energy security, taking into consideration that the amount of energy generated from 
variable RES will have significantly increased and there is a potential necessity for reserve 
power. 
The  consumption  of  electricity  has  increased,  and  it  is  mainly  related  to  the 
electrification of the transport system, the use of electricity in heat supply, and the increase of 
the living standard of inhabitants, i.e., an increased number of electric appliances. Taking into 
consideration the high-capacity technologies of variable RES (solar and wind energy) installed, 
electricity accumulation technologies are commercially developed and introduced. 
 
6.4. Resource-efficient and Environmentally Friendly Transport 
 
In 2050, the transport sector is decarbonised which is mainly achieved owing to different 
initiatives and innovations in the transport infrastructure and vehicle technologies, as well as 
owing to changes in everyday habits of the society. 
 
•  Road transport is mainly electrified and charging infrastructure is widely 
accessible 
 
Convenient, fast, economically advantageous, environment-friendly vehicles, as well as 
safe transport connections among the countries and inside them are accessible to the society. 
Promotion of the use of non-fossil fuels is one of the main measures for reducing the negative 
environmental impact of the transport sector. In order to reduce the impact of the transport 
sector on climate change, as well as to reduce environmental pollution and consumption of 
fossil energy resources, transition of the private road transport to electric drive, the use of 
synthetic fuel, biofuel (not first-generation biofuel), biomethane, hydrogen, and other non-fossil 
fuels has taken place. 
Upon advancing the country towards climate neutrality, the environmental, social, and 
economic interests are balanced. 
Electric vehicles have become the dominating mode of transportation because they do 
not generate GHG emissions when operated and, owing to the development of technologies, 
allow covering of greater distances without charging. 
The infrastructure for the charging of electric vehicles is available on TEN-T62 roads 
and in cities, allowing for the convenient and fast charging of electric vehicles. Fast charging 
stations are widely accessible, thus not causing inconveniences in relation to the length of 
charging to users of cars. Electricity generated from RES is used for the charging of electric 
vehicles. 
The spread of electric vehicles has also promoted the development of the service 
infrastructure, ensuring accessible and developed service, profitable financial solutions for the 
purchase of electric vehicles, and link-up with the intelligent transport systems63. The tax 
 
62TEN-T – European Transport Network 
63Intelligent transport systems – transport systems where information and communication technologies are used 
for improvement of efficiency and safety of the transport. For example, by using the Global Navigation Satellite 
Systems (GNSS), the Geographical Information System (GIS), data processing, wireless data transmission and 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  41 system completely conforms to the principle “polluter pays” which has reduced the use of 
vehicles operated with fossil fuel to the minimum. 
State administration and local government authorities have renewed their fleet with 
environment-friendly vehicles, thus setting an example for the society. 
 
•  Air transport efficiently uses modern biofuels and energy-efficient solutions 
are integrated into aircraft and airports 
 
High-performance fuels and biofuels have reduced GHG emissions from air transport. 
Owing to technological innovations and improvements of efficiency, the aviation sector has 
become more efficient and is using RES fuels (biopetrol and e-fuel). Air transport is efficiently 
using biofuels other than first-generation biofuels and alternative fuels, including possibilities 
of  electric  mobility,  particularly  in  small-scale  aviation  and  domestic  aerial  transport. 
Improvements of efficiency have been introduced both on aircraft and also at airports, allowing 
to reduce GHG emissions generated by the machinery servicing aircraft and airports. Efficiency 
and technological innovations have also reduced the noise caused by air transport, making the 
vicinity of airports more friendly to inhabitants and the environment. 
 
•  Rail transport is mainly electrified and/or other alternative fuels are used for 
the performance of carriage 
 
The majority of rail lines are electrified. Electric trains and trains which can be operated 
using other alternative fuels are used for the carriage of both passengers and freights. Hydrogen 
or biofuel is mainly used on the non-electrified lines. Part of the rail lines are high-speed lines, 
ensuring fast, efficient, and environmentally friendly carriage of freights and passengers. 
 
•  Alternative  fuels  and  energy-efficient  solutions  for  the  reduction  of  fuel 
consumption are used in water transport 
 
GHG emissions in water transport are significantly reduced by using such tools as the 
hull design (which improves energy efficiency), different economies of scale resulting from 
capacity  and  drive  solutions,  optimum  speed,  determination  of  weather  conditions  and 
planning, alternative energy sources, and RES. E-fuel, hydrogen, biofuel in pure form or mixed 
with fossil fuel are used from RES, thus reducing both GHG emissions and environmental load. 
Electrification of ports reduces emissions from ships standing in ports, thus decreasing the 
negative impact of ports on the surrounding environment and climate. 
 
•  Sustainable and environmentally friendly mobility of inhabitants has been 
ensured 
 
The public transport system is efficient and sustainable, thus successfully competing 
with the private transport. The public transport is co-modal64 and sustainable, thus successfully 
competing with the private transport. It has reduced traffic jams and GHG emissions generated 
by road transport, significantly improved air quality in cities and the attractiveness of urban 
environment. The park and ride system has significantly expanded, the use of bicycles, scooters, 
segways, and other inventory has increased, and attractive circumstances for pedestrians have 
 
sensors (road weather stations, video cameras, traffic counters, etc.), the intelligent transport systems are able to 
distribute traffic information (driving conditions, traffic restrictions and obstacles), as well as to perform adaptive 
traffic management (traffic lights, electronic road signs) and control. Global trends in the development of 
intelligent transport systems are moving towards introduction of autonomous vehicles.  
64Co-modality – combining of one or several modes of transport in order to use resources in an optimum and 
sustainable manner. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  42 been created, introducing green infrastructure solutions in urban environment. Mainly railway 
is used in intercity carriage because it uses less energy per passenger-kilometre than road 
transport. 
The public transport is conveniently linked to the international transport (connections 
with airports and ports). 
The sharing culture has been developed, allowing to use vehicles individually or jointly 
for a specific fee. 
 
•  Freight  carriage  is  performed  using  an  interlinked,  efficient,  and  smart 
transport system, as well as multi-modal carriage 
 
The link-up of road transport with the rail and port infrastructures has reduced the fuel 
consumption and GHG emissions from road transport. Electric trains allow for faster and 
cheaper delivery of freights to logistics centres which are connected to carriers of the local 
government level. A developed port infrastructure allows for efficient servicing of the incoming 
freight ships. Logistics algorithms are widely used for planning of routes. The use of multi-
modal carriage65 allows to choose the most optimal and environmentally friendly mode of 
transport in individual distances. 
 
•  Road infrastructure corresponds to the latest transport trends, integrating 
intelligent transport systems 
 
A unified and modern road network is ensured, allowing for safe and fast movement in 
the territory of Latvia and equipped with such charging/filling infrastructure of vehicles which 
has been integrated into the European transport system and conveniently allows continuation 
of the travel outside the country. 
The  use  of  intelligent  transport  systems  both  in  the  infrastructure  and  vehicles 
themselves allows for the reduction of GHG emissions, concurrently improving traffic safety. 
The data of such systems are available for re-use with the intermediation of the national access 
point of transport of traffic information. 
 
•  The development of the road network is planned in a sustainable manner, 
taking  into  consideration  the  transport  development  trends,  inter  alia 
conforming  to  the  safety  of  less  protected  road  traffic  participants  and 
reducing the impact of road building on the environment and climate 
 
The road infrastructure is planned so that inhabitants can conveniently and safely arrive 
at their final destination using public transport, shared transport, bicycle, or on foot. Safety of 
less protected traffic participants is ensured, as well as attention is paid to reduction of the 
impact of road building on the environment and climate, including by introducing green 
infrastructure solutions. 
Different new, sustainable, and environmentally friendly mobility solutions allow to 
increase  efficiency  and  safety  of  transportation,  concurrently  without  reducing  economic 
attraction. The development of innovations allows the export of new technological solutions 
also in the field of transport, for example, the development of unmanned aircraft, etc. 
 
 
65Carriage of the same freight batch with different types of transport according to one joint bill of lading. Freight 
is reloaded from one type of transport to another, transport chains at different points, for example, consignor – 
road transport – warehouse – rail transport – warehouse – container – container ship – consignee. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  43 •  Extensive  use  of  digital  solutions  has  reduced  the  necessity  for  business 
movement for inhabitants 
 
Movement of inhabitants has been optimised owing to the possibilities of remote work, 
studies, shopping, etc. High performance and safe Internet network throughout the territory of 
Latvia allows the inhabitants to fulfil their work duties fully also remotely. Comprehensive 
introduction of e-services has allowed to reduce the necessity for inhabitants to visit authorities 
for the receipt of services. 
 
6.5. Sustainable Land Management and Agriculture 
 
Sustainable land management policy has been developed and successfully introduced in 
Latvia. It is ensured that land management, including the LULUCF and agriculture sectors, 
provide  contribution  to  achieving  climate  neutrality  by  using  the  newest  technologies, 
sustainable management practice, and efficient planning, without restricting the development 
of national economy. 
 
•  Sustainable balance among different types of land use has been achieved in 
conformity with the climate, nature protection, economic, and social aspects 
 
Sustainable land management is planned at both national and regional level, assessing 
and taking into consideration the special regional features. Local governments and other parties 
involved are participating in the planning and implementation process, using the integrated 
planning approach and assessing the joint benefits (ecosystem services) to the environment and 
society. The decisions are taken on the grounds of data-based information which has been 
obtained from the State monitoring programme regarding the type of land use, including soil 
monitoring. 
The necessity for land transformation from one type of use to another is under serious 
evaluation. For example, a non-sustainable arrangement of crop plantations, expansion of 
agricultural land for the growing of bioenergy crops which are deemed as a serious threat to 
biological diversity and the ability of ecosystems to withstand climate change is limited. 
Similarly use of land that hitherto has been irrational is limited. 
Support is provided to reafforestation of degraded land and renaturalisation of deposits 
from which mineral resources have been extracted. The development of the infrastructure and 
building is being carefully planned in a long-term manner, reducing the foreseeable impact on 
environment and facilitating progression towards climate neutrality as much as possible. The 
aspect of adaptation to climate change is also taken into consideration in the use of land 
resources. 
The amount of support and the procedures for granting it are carefully evaluated in 
agriculture and forestry, taking into consideration all aspects of sustainability, including impact 
on the achievement of the objectives of the Strategy. 
 
•  All forests of Latvia are managed in a sustainable manner 
 
Forest and its products and services are a significant source of public welfare, as well as 
a significant strategic resource of Latvia for sustainable rural and joint national development. 
State forests, as well as private forests are managed in a sustainable manner. 
Forest productivity, its resilience against different natural disturbances, including spread 
of pests, has been increased and sustainable age structure of the forest has been established. 
The forest ensures timber for construction and furniture, residues of its processing – 
heating fuel for the generation of energy, moreover, forest is a recreational resource. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  44 Timber  industry  is  oriented  towards  more  diverse  processing  of  timber  and 
manufacturing of internationally competitive final products with high added value. 
Optimum proportion of protected areas has been evaluated and ensured, achieving a 
balance between environmental protection, economic, and social needs. 
 
•  Agriculture and forestry provides a significant contribution to bioenergy, 
concurrently not endangering provision of food and CO  removals 
2
 
Timber from forests of Latvia is obtained in a sustainable manner, carefully planning 
the amount of acquisition thereof. Balance between deforestation and afforestation is ensured. 
It is ensured that forests of Latvia have sustainable age structure66. The total amount of timber 
resources in the country does not decrease. Biomass is primarily obtained in order to sell it on 
the local market, thus ensuring achievement of the national objective of the proportion of 
renewable energy. Concurrently, upon implementing the forest management, it is also taken 
into  account  that  forest  stands  that  have  been  purposefully  renewed  with  high-quality 
reproductive material are more resistant towards extreme weather conditions arising from 
climate change. 
Without endangering the biological diversity, new varieties which are more resistant 
towards climate change and ensure optimum CO  removals are being bred and used. 
2
Biofuels of the newest generation which reduce the risks that the crops to be used in 
food and the soil fit for growing food is being used for the acquisition of bioenergy have been 
developed. 
The cleanest technologies and methods are used in agriculture and forestry in all stages 
of the management process, choosing sustainability, impact on the environment, climate, and 
health as the essential criteria. 
 
•  Agriculture and forestry of Latvia is resource-efficient – high productivity has 
been achieved, products with high added value are produced 
 
Land is used efficiently, in conformity with sustainability of the use of bioresources and 
giving preference to such types of use in the use of bioresources which results in higher added 
value (i.e., in conformity with the principle of cascading). Timber industry is oriented towards 
diverse processing of timber and manufacturing of internationally competitive final products 
with high added value. 
Good agronomy and livestock husbandry practice is implemented in agriculture, thus 
ensuring the preservation of land resources for the next generations. Improved varieties and 
accurate use of fertiliser dosage are selected for increasing the productivity, as well as rotation 
of crops is conformed to, involving perennial crops and leguminous plants therein, as well as 
maintaining the soil cover throughout the year in places where erosion is possible. The use of 
mineral fertilisers is being carefully planned – the use of leguminous plants in the crop rotation 
has allowed to reduce the dosage of the synthetic nitrogen fertiliser and the growing of catch 
crops ensures that the nitrogen not used by the cover crops does not reach the environment. 
Innovative technologies are used for precise drainage of the fertiliser to plants, allowing to 
reduce the consumption of the fertiliser and its negative environmental impact. Maintaining of 
the soil fertility – increase of the carbon supply in the soil – is essential. The use of manure, 
ensuring the fastest possible application thereof to the soil, helps avoiding the soil compaction 
and deep ploughing. 
Livestock farming is planned, taking into account the latest scientific knowledge. Only 
such fodder is used which ensures optimum digestion processes for animals, without harming 
their health. Manure depositories are established, their use is efficiently controlled. Biogas from 
 
66Sustainable forest age structure – levelled age structure when the proportion of adult stands, stands of medium 
age, and young stands in the cut of economically most significant species is equivalent. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  45 the processing of manure and other organic waste is obtained in households where it is 
economically feasible. Health and welfare of farm animals is ensured. 
Innovations have been successfully introduced in agriculture and forestry, as well as in 
other sectors of national economy. The newest scientific knowledge is used. Decisions on the 
introduction of new policies and measures are taken sustainably by analysing the benefits and 
losses, as well as their impact on other policies. Thus emissions from the agricultural production 
unit are reduced. 
 
•  Research of organic soil has been conducted and corresponding use is applied 
thereto 
 
Awareness of the processes taking place in organic soil, their impact on and relation to 
the surrounding environment is developed. The current situation has been surveyed, including 
areas of organic soil have been surveyed, information regarding soil is regularly updated. 
Suitable choice of the type of land use for the areas of UUA organic soil which are not 
actively used for the production of agricultural products due to different reasons (for example, 
low qualitative value of soil, extensive resources for the renewal of amelioration systems are 
necessary, non-existence of access roads, configuration and location of fields) is ensured. 
 
6.6. Sustainable Consumption and Manufacturing 
 
The acquisition and use of material resources are sustainable, ensuring high resource-
efficiency in Latvia. This allows to achieve better and higher results using less resources. 
Economic development is not based on intense consumption of energy and resources. 
Upon implementation of LCD, such action policy and support mechanisms, including product 
policy and tax mechanisms, are ensured in Latvia which ensure that the use of natural resources 
is  economic  and  sustainable  as  a  result  of  which  continuous  increase  of  manufacturing 
efficiency and resource productivity is achieved, reaching the average indicators of the EU 
states in long-term and persistently striving towards even higher result. 
The society has reached such level of maturity and environmental awareness that it 
understands the idea of sustainable development and is participating in its implementation. The 
buying and consumption habits of the society are sustainable, environmentally friendly and 
prudent in terms of natural resources. Efficient models of sharing economy are operating, and 
they are supplemented with forms of diverse social entrepreneurship and community economy. 
Economic development is shaped in a way to use the raw materials, as well as any 
manufacturing by-products and residues as much and completely as possible. The objective is 
achieved not only by using the technologies, but also non-economic manufacturing and non-
sustainable lifestyle of the society (in relation to consumption habits) both in the public and 
private sectors is prevented. More thought-out design solutions and efficient processing of 
materials  have  improved  re-use  of  resources  and  has  reduced  the  total  consumption  of 
resources. 
 
•  Only climate and environmentally friendly alternatives of chemical substances 
are used 
 
The  chemical  substances  which  are  harmful  to  the  climate  and  are  used  both  in 
manufacturing and provision or services, as well as in everyday life have been substituted with 
friendlier alternatives. 
The amount of household chemical substance use in households has been reduced as 
much as possible. 
 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  46 •  No waste, just raw materials 
 
The manufacturing models implemented by enterprises are based on innovations, they 
are directed towards efficient use of resources throughout the life cycle of the product, ensuring 
that resources return into economic circulation. Enterprises implement mutual cooperation in 
the use of resources (the solutions of industrial symbiosis have been developed, as well as 
industrial clusters are being formed). 
 
•  The society has changed its habits, the demand of inhabitants promotes more 
extensive offer of environmentally friendly goods and services on the market 
 
Not just the manufacturers, but also the society at large are responsible for sustainable 
development because the latter creates the demand for the relevant goods or services. 
Each individual, collective (school, institution, office, etc.), family, and household are 
aware of the impact of their choices on the climate, environment, and consumption of resources, 
thus they have evaluated their attitude towards consumption of resources – how they use water 
and energy, how much and what waste is generated by them and where does such waste end 
up, how they consume food, what their movement and buying habits are, what goods they 
purchase and how they use them, what services they use. 
Households, upon using tools accessible to the public, have specified their “carbon 
footprint”67 – the amount of CO  emissions generated by each individual or product within a 
2
year and diligently follows this indication in order to prevent its increase. 
Changing the consumption habits (behaviour) of private and public buyers helps to 
achieve resource-efficiency and also provides fiscal benefits. This, in turn, promotes demand 
for services and goods which are more efficient in terms of resources. Consumers can save costs 
by precluding the occurrence of waste themselves and by buying goods that can be used for a 
more extended period of time or which are easier to repair or recycle. Such services which offer 
repair, service, and lease are extensively available and used. 
Social movements, information and education campaigns, as well as civic initiative have 
a large significance. There are many mechanisms for the transfer of private initiatives/skills 
where people share their personal experience regarding the possibilities of re-use of materials 
(textile, etc.) by recycling them into household products with their own hands. 
Taking into consideration the latest scientific studies, a database of the laws and 
regulations, as well as guidelines and other methodological materials for the application of GPP 
and green procurement have been developed. The GPP component is applied in all public 
procurements. 
 
6.7. Sustainable Local Governments and Urban Environment 
 
Without  initiatives  and  active  actions  of  local  governments  for  climate  change 
mitigation at regional level, the achievement of the national objectives is endangered. Upon 
performing the mandatory functions specified in the laws and regulations, local governments 
have many opportunities for the promotion of achievement of the national objectives for the 
reduction of GHG emissions. 
 
 
67For the purposes of nature balance, undisturbed renewal of resources, and prevention of climate change 
(assuming that stabilisation of the average increase of global temperature must be ensured within the limits of 2 °C 
with a far-reaching goal within the limits of 1.5 °C) the “carbon footprint” per inhabitant may not exceed 3 t CO
2 
. 
eq
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  47 •  Cities and municipalities provide a contribution to climate change mitigation, 
being aware of their actual impact on climate change, as well as their key role 
in achieving the national objectives for GHG emissions 
 
Each local government, upon using the tools accessible to the public for the evaluation 
of GHG emissions, has specified the quantity thereof generated in its administrative territory. 
Local governments are aware of the potential of reducing GHG emissions and are implementing 
it, as well as regularly make evaluation compare their performance with the (benchmark) 
indicators of other local governments on the basis of the information obtained. 
 
•  Local  governments  are  taking  an  active  part  in  different  local  and 
international initiatives “local governments learn from local governments”, 
being aware of their possibilities in climate change mitigation, as well as 
bringing  forward  ambitious  GHG  objectives  and  mutually  exchanging 
experience in the achievement thereof 
 
By participating in voluntary international initiatives for climate change mitigation68, 
local governments gain access to an extensive network for the exchange of information, receive 
current information, including regarding the planned measures, funding opportunities, good 
practice  and  examples,  as  well  as  the  results  of  initiatives  implemented  by  other  local 
governments. The capacity of local governments is strengthened in mutual cooperation, as well 
as assistance is received and provided for the monitoring, evaluation, and reporting on meeting 
the objectives brought forward. Cooperation initiatives are supported in planning documents of 
local governments. 
Upon cooperation between the local governments and the State, the local governments 
develop a coordinated approach in the field of climate change mitigation and prevention, 
introducing solutions for climate change mitigation and climate resilience in their development 
planning documents. 
 
•  Local governments plan and implement such spatial planning measures which 
promote  the  creation  of  comprehensively  organised  and  complex  urban 
surroundings 
 
Local governments, upon developing and reviewing the spatial planning which includes 
both the determination of the functional zoning and the development of the conditions for the 
use and building of the territory, integrate complex solutions therein for the availability of 
services in conformity with the technological development and changes in habits of inhabitants, 
promoting that more extensive range of the goods and services necessary in everyday life is 
offered in the vicinity of cities, thus reducing the distance covered due to movement of 
transactions. 
 
•  Transport infrastructure in cities and municipalities is smart and optimised 
 
A developed park and ride infrastructure, as well as multi-modal centres provide an 
opportunity to choose the mode of transportation that is most appropriate for the distance and 
route  necessary.  The  route  network  of  the  public  transport  system  is  extensive  and 
comprehensive, it offers the necessary level of comfort to the customers and is extensively used. 
Streets in cities are planned so that people have convenient and safe alternatives for 
reaching the final destination with public transport, shared vehicle, bicycle, on foot, leaving the 
private vehicle at a conveniently available site in case of necessity. 
 
68For example, Compact of Mayors, Covenant of Mayors, Non-state Actor Zone for Climate Change (NAZCA). 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  48 The infrastructure of non-motorised vehicles is being developed and pedestrian zones 
are being expanded. The infrastructure of bicycle routes is available and extensively used. 
 
•  The urban environment is smart, digital solutions are used 
 
The  use  of  the  Internet  of  things  (IoT),  concurrently  taking  into  consideration 
cybersecurity and without violating the privacy of inhabitants, allows to supervise and control 
different systems (energy supply, public utilities, transport, security, etc.) efficiently and with 
a reduced consumption of resources in a remote manner, as well as to respond adequately to 
changes therein without delay. The concept of smart local government, i.e. complex solutions, 
combining investments into infrastructure with ICT, environmentally and climate friendly 
solutions, is also being extensively implemented for efficient provision of services. 
 
•  The urban environment is flexible, the city as a system has high capacity of 
resistance in case of different anthropogenic and natural shocks 
 
Local governments are aware that the urban environment is more subjected to climate 
change risks  (flood,  sea-level  rise, heat  waves, insufficiency of drinking water, drought, 
extreme precipitation, and storms) than rural areas and are ready for successful overcoming 
thereof, are able to implement positive adaptation because they have surveyed their strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities and threats, for example, the solutions of the green infrastructure are 
extensively used for the prevention and mitigation of the urban “heat island” effect. 
In order to take decisions in relation to the measures for climate change mitigation and 
adaptation to climate change, local governments are using the current publicly available 
meteorological  data  characterising  the  micro-climate  and  its  changes  in  the  relevant 
administrative territory. Local governments attract different interested parties from amongst 
scientific, entrepreneurial non-governmental organisations in order to assess and develop both 
short-term and long-term solutions for climate change mitigation and adaptation thereto which 
are suitable for the particular administrative territory. Local governments have performed a 
vulnerability risk assessment to climate impact, the planning and introduction, as well as 
monitoring and assessment of measures for adaptation to climate change. 
 
•  The use of local RES non-emission technologies in urban environment has been 
developed 
 
Local governments are aware that increasing the proportion of RES non-emission 
technologies is not just a liability, but also a possibility to optimise energy supply, to use the 
lowest cost price of local energy resources and to reduce dependence on energy import, to 
improve the environmental quality, and to increase self-assurance of inhabitants. 
Smart  RES  technologies  of  urban  environment  are  increasingly  used  for  energy 
generation in urban environment, combining cultural and historical elements of the architecture 
and innovative building solutions and materials, promoting autonomous energy generation 
using non-emission technologies. The use of low-capacity, economically feasible, and visually 
attractive RES technologies is an integral part of every city. 
A constant informative support provided by the local government to households in 
relation to the solutions and possibilities of energy efficiency and use of RES encourages and 
motivates the households to choose the solutions of energy supply which are individually most 
suitable to them and most friendly to the environment. 
   
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  49 7. Implementation and Review of the Strategy 
 
Implementation  of  the  Strategy  is  a  long-term  challenge  to  every  socially  and 
economically active inhabitant. The Strategy is the first policy planning document for such a 
long period of time in Latvia. Successful implementation thereof will require understanding 
and involvement, as well as consistent actions not only from the State, but also from local 
governments, non-governmental organisations, merchants, researchers, and every inhabitant of 
the State. In order to evaluate the introduction of the Strategy, a periodic report on the progress 
of the Strategy and evaluation of the efficiency of introduction thereof must be ensured. 
 
7.1. Parties Involved in the Implementation of the Strategy 
 
•  State administration (each ministry within the scope of its competence) has 
improved and developed policy planning documents and laws and regulations 
of each sector of national economy so that they conform to the objectives 
declared in the Strategy 
 
The Strategy is implemented by preparing and introducing national climate and energy 
plans (the first of them by 2030, taking into consideration the objectives of 2050 and the vision 
for 2050 laid out in the Strategy) the necessity of which is determined by the Energy Union. 
These plans consist of 5 dimensions: energy security, solidarity, and trust; fully-integrated 
European internal energy market; energy efficiency (including in transport); decarbonising the 
economy; research, innovation, and competitiveness. 
As extensive involvement of the society as possible is necessary for the achievement of 
the objectives of the Strategy. Education has an essential role in shaping the awareness of the 
society regarding climate change processes and the actions necessary for their mitigation. The 
principles of low carbon development are included in the content of the education system. All 
educational institutions also implement the LCD principles in their everyday work, providing a 
contribution to reduction of energy consumption, resources, and waste amount and increase of 
energy efficiency. 
Research-based higher education ensures integration of the newest scientific knowledge 
in the study process and in the preparation of new specialists. 
Inhabitants of Latvia at large are aware of the climate change processes and the logic of 
climate  policy  measures  and  make  their  individual  choices  and  actions,  taking  into 
consideration the principles of low carbon development. Every inhabitant of Latvia is aware of 
the activities of the global market and the mechanisms for the circulation of resources, and 
chooses to adapt his or her consumption habits to the principles of sustainable development. 
Every inhabitant of Latvia has access to clearly understandable and justified information 
regarding objectives of the Strategy. 
 
•  Local governments develop in a sustainable manner and have reduced GHG 
emissions in regions, as well as have promoted the development of low carbon 
enterprises (green employment) 
 
Local governments set their objectives for the reduction of GHG emissions and show 
progress in achievement of such objectives by regularly informing the inhabitants thereof. 
Local governments, upon organising their work, set an example to the private sector, as 
well as inform and educate the society of solutions for climate change mitigation. 
Planning regions also have a significant role as they develop long-term and medium-
term  development  planning  documents,  including  taking  into  consideration  the  national 
objectives for the reduction of GHG emissions, in cooperation with local governments and State 
administration institutions. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  50  
•  Merchants have actively engaged in the development of new, innovative, and 
sustainable products and establish environment-friendly enterprises 
 
The Strategy must promote reduction of GHG emissions of Latvia, without reducing 
economic competitiveness of Latvia. The Strategy creates an environment for the stability and 
growth of existing enterprises, as well as promotes the establishment of new, innovative, 
sustainable, and environment-friendly enterprises. An increasing number of inhabitants is 
employed in green work places which are producing climate and environmentally friendly 
goods and services. An increasing number of private enterprises applies GP in their activity in 
order to reduce their environmental impact. The State and local governments provide an 
enhanced support to new entrepreneurs in order to promote LCD and advancement towards 
climate neutrality. Funding from different State, EU, and private financial authorities and 
mechanisms is available for the support to sustainable entrepreneurship. 
Stable and sustainable development of entrepreneurship is a pre-condition for the 
welfare of inhabitants of Latvia and arranged environment. 
 
•  Households are actively applying the LCD principles for the achievement of 
climate neutrality 
 
The joint advancement of the State towards climate neutrality is shaped by everyday 
choices of each inhabitant. Each household is responsible for energy efficiency of the dwelling, 
the technologies and devices used, as well as the habits of use of the selected energy resources, 
reducing the negative impact on climate and environment. Households mutually exchange good 
practice and experience in attempts of changing their environmental impact. 
 
7.2. Instruments to be Used in the Implementation of the Strategy 
 
The instruments to be used for implementation of the Strategy may be divided into 
groups according to both their essence and the objective to be achieved. On the basis of the 
current experience it is useful to distinguish five groups of instruments: public information, 
legal acts and regulatory framework, market mechanisms, fiscal instruments, and financial 
instruments. 
 
•  Public information and raising of awareness 
 
Regardless of conclusive evidence69 of climate change and its negative impact on the 
environment and human health, many inhabitants of Latvia are still not sufficiently informed 
of climate change, the risks caused thereby, as well as actions to be taken for the mitigation 
thereof. Public information and raising of awareness regarding climate change processes is one 
of the most significant measures for increasing interest and motivation of inhabitants to become 
involved in solving of the issues related to climate change, therefore, it should be provided for 
in the development of new documents of action policy what measures for raising awareness of 
the society will be implemented. 
 
•  Legal acts and regulatory framework 
 
Legal acts and regulatory framework should include all other instruments to be used in 
the implementation of the Strategy. Legal acts are one of the ways of governing the operation 
 
69IPCC, Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report, 2014. Available online: https://www.ipcc.ch/pdf/assessment-
report/ar5/syr/SYR_AR5_FINAL_full.pdf 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  51 of all other instruments and characteristics of different elements thereof may be specified in 
such legal acts. In addition such conditions, standards, requirements, and processes may be 
specified in legal acts which are not included in the instruments referred to in this Sub-chapter. 
Legal acts and regulatory framework may be based not only on laws and regulations developed 
and approved by the public sector, but it may also be created based upon the voluntary 
agreement principle between different parties. 
 
•  Market mechanisms 
 
Introduction  of  different  new  market  mechanisms,  as  well  as  development  and 
improvement  of  market  mechanisms  already  existing  have  a  significant  importance  in 
advancement towards climate neutrality. Participation in the EU ETS is currently topical for 
Latvia. The existing system has been established, however, work on further improvement 
thereof must be continued in order to be able to help to achieve the climate objectives in a 
wholesome manner. The EU ETS is able to carry out its task – to stimulate operators to take 
measures reducing GHG emissions – only if the emission quota is relatively high. Taking into 
consideration that the amount of allowances to be traded and their price on the market have an 
essential role in planning new market mechanisms, the amount of allowances in circulation and 
their impact on other market mechanisms should be planned in detail. In addition to the EU 
ETS, several emissions trading schemes are operating in the world, for example, in China, USA, 
Korea, Switzerland, New Zealand, Canada, and Japan. Therefore, a national emissions trading 
scheme could also be established in Latvia by 2050 according to the national interests, for 
example,  in  the  forestry  sector.  Furthermore,  there  is  a  high  probability  that  a  single 
international market mechanism will be established in the nearest future within the scope of the 
Paris Agreement. 
 
•  Fiscal instruments 
 
The main fiscal instruments for the introduction of the Strategy are taxes and subsidies. 
Tax groups of two types may be distinguished: taxes having direct impact on the reduction of 
GHG emissions and taxes which indirectly promote the reduction of GHG emissions. Taxes 
reducing GHG emissions or taxes in which, for example, CO  is a tax component with direct 
2
impact are the best means for the introduction of the polluter pays principle. The tax system as 
a whole should be restructured by 2050 so that the promotion of climate change mitigation and 
adaptation to climate change would become an integral part of objectives of the taxes of the 
relevant categories. In turn, taxes with indirect impact promote reduction of GHG emissions by 
having an effect on resources, goods, and services which are used in the processes of significant 
importance to the generation of GHG emissions. In such a way their consumption is reduced, 
concurrently stimulating the use of RES. 
Subsidies, reliefs, tax refunds should also be used to achieve the climate neutrality. 
Subsidies to fossil heating fuels should be denounced completely, focusing on and shifting 
towards support to RES. 
 
•  Financial instruments 
 
Financial instruments are loans, funds, securities, risk capital, etc. Financial instruments 
are an efficient resource through the use of which the maximum extent of private capital can be 
attracted and activated with public funding. From the perspective of the beneficiary, traditional 
grants where the public funding is allocated for a programme or project are attractive, however, 
in such a way part of the public funding is withdrawn from circulation. In the future, greater 
focus should be put on different friendly types of loans, for example, by creating a national 
energy efficiency fund which will provide long-term and low-interest loans, ensuring special 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  52 insurance against the failure to fulfil loan obligations or offering a specific rebate for the 
repayment of the common costs if energy savings have been proven, or also by providing 
interest-free loans to low-income households. Potentially, the blending financial instrument 
which includes both the grant and the loan part could be an efficient way for the attraction of 
private investments. 
The principle of rotation funds which is becoming increasingly popular in the financing 
of energy efficiency projects may also be used. Loans and rotation funds ensure the return of 
the public capital into circulation as a result of which new projects can be funded. Development 
of the financing of third parties should also be continued, for example, by attracting energy 
service companies (ESCO) or local government energy service enterprises (LGESCO) which 
invest into energy-saving measures and recovers the made investments from the energy savings 
achieved in long-term. 
The  development  of  public-private  partnership  (PPP)  should  be  continued  in  a 
purposeful manner for successful and sustainable provision of public services, development and 
maintenance of the infrastructure by joining and jointly using the resources available thereto in 
a  long-term  cooperation  –  the  property,  financial  resources,  knowledge,  and  experience, 
dividing  also  the  risks,  investments,  and  benefits  related  to  the  implementation  of  PPP. 
Moreover, the public sector should closely link the planned activities with the inventory of 
GHG emissions when working on planning the budget of financial instruments. 
The development of green obligations also has an essential role in combat against 
climate change as through them funding can be attracted for projects which contribute to the 
combat against climate change or such projects can be re-financed. The way in which the 
financial resources obtained from obligations are used is becoming increasingly important for 
investors, and green obligations is the way of making sustainable investments. 
In order to advance towards climate neutrality in 2050, the funding available within the 
scope of the multiannual financial framework for the implementation of climate activities will 
have a significant role, taking into consideration the priorities specified in the policy planning 
documents. The LCD principles as a horizontal issue should be taken into account when making 
contributions in introduction of the funding from EU funds. 
The costs of energy systems consist of the costs of the maintenance and operation of 
systems, investments in technologies and energy efficiency, as well as the costs for the heating 
fuel consumed. As costs are foreseeable also in the base scenario because in any case for the 
system to be able to ensure consumers with the necessary services it is necessary to maintain 
and update it continuously,  additional investments  and additional  costs are  used for the 
characterisation  of  the  costs  of  the  climate  neutrality  scenario  in  comparison  with  the 
implementation of the base scenario. 
According to  the initial  indicative projections70 the additional investments  for the 
implementation of the target scenario (achievement of climate neutrality) in comparison with 
the base scenario in the time period up to 2050 are approximately EUR 16 billion (in constant 
prices of 2010) or 1.35 % on average per year from GDP in the time period (2020–2050). 
However, owing to these investments, benefits also arise, for example, from reduction 
of the costs for heating fuel (also due to the increase in efficiency of the use of resources) and 
other savings of operation costs. Therefore, the total additional costs for the implementation of 
the target scenario in the time period until 2050 in comparison with the total costs of the base 
scenario according to the initial indicative projections71 are EUR 13.5 billion (in constant prices 
of 2010) or 1.1 % on average per year from GDP in the time period (2020–2050). 
 
70Initial evaluation of the study of the Institute of Physical Energetics Latvijas tautsaimniecības attīstības 
iespējamo scenāriju līdz 2050.gadam izstrāde atbilstoši Eiropas Savienības ilgtermiņa attīstības redzējumam 
[Drawing-up of the Potential Scenarios for the Development of National Economy of Latvia until 2050 according 
to the Long-term Development Vision of the European Union], December 2019. 
71Initial evaluation of the study of the Institute of Physical Energetics Latvijas tautsaimniecības attīstības 
iespējamo scenāriju līdz 2050.gadam izstrāde atbilstoši Eiropas Savienības ilgtermiņa attīstības redzējumam 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  53 The funding necessary for the implementation of the objectives specified in the Strategy 
will be evaluated upon development of new sectoral planning documents. 
 
7.3. Review of the Strategy 
 
The Strategy shall be reviewed by 1 January 2029 and later after every 10 years72. The 
Strategy may be reviewed more often by submitting a justification (informative report) to the 
Cabinet. 
The MoEPRD shall submit an informative report on the progress of the implementation 
and achieving of the performance-based results of the Strategy to the Cabinet for the evaluation 
of the Strategy. 
   
 
[Drawing-up of the Potential Scenarios for the Development of National Economy of Latvia until 2050 according 
to the Long-term Development Vision of the European Union], December 2019. 
72The next review of the Strategy must be submitted to the European Commission by 1 January 2029. 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  54 8. Public Participation 
 
In order to promote public awareness of LCD and to ensure public participation in the 
creation of the Strategy, the MoEPRD has been actively implementing different publicity 
measures and measures for shaping public opinion since 2016 – public consultations, public 
discussions (several of them could also be watched online), publications on the website of the 
MoEPRD were also prepared, as well as brochures (electronically and in paper form) in order 
to distribute them at general secondary institutions and higher education institutions and at non-
governmental organisations working on climate issues. 
A public discussion organised by the MoEPRD regarding the future of Latvia in the new 
climate  reality  also  took  place  in  Riga  at  the  time  of  signing  the  Paris  Agreement  (on 
22 April 2016), and high-level officials of the OECD also participated therein amongst others. 
In order to involve local governments, regional branches of State institutions, leaders of 
local public groups and merchants, academic staff, as well as other interested persons, five 
interactive seminars regarding climate change mitigation and LCD by 2050 were implemented 
in all planning regions of Latvia in autumn 2016 and at the beginning of 2017. 
In summer of 2019, the MoEPRD organised the visit of the Director of Climate Strategy 
of the EC Directorate-General for Climate Action in Latvia in order to discuss achieving of 
climate neutrality within the context of the EC Communication. Meetings with the social 
partners (representatives of the Employers’ Confederation of Latvia, the Association of Large 
Cities  of  Latvia,  the  Latvian  Agricultural  Organisation  Cooperation  Council,  and  youth 
movement Fridays for Future), as well as representatives from sectoral ministries and the 
Saeima were held during the visit. 
During the development stage, the draft Strategy was published on the website of the 
MoEPRD for public consultation, and it was also announced in the meeting of State Secretaries. 
 
 
Minister for Environmental Protection and Regional Development     J. Pūce 
 
 
Translation © 2020 Valsts valodas centrs (State Language Centre)  55 