Norway’s long-term low-emission strategy for 2050  
– An innovative society with attractive towns and communities  
 
Note: The strategy was adopted in Norway by the Norwegian Parliament in October 2019. In 
February, 2020 Norway updated and enhanced its nationally determined contribution under 
the Paris Agreement to reduce emissions by.at least 50 per cent and up towards 55 per cent 
by 2030, compared to 1990-levels. This is not fully reflected in the translated text. 
 
Also note: The Norway's long-term low-emission strategy for 2050 as presented here has 
been translated from its original Norwegian language.  
 
Introduction  
 
Climate change is having impacts in larger and larger parts of the world, and there has been 
no decline in global greenhouse gas emissions in recent years. At the same time, there are 
growing losses of biodiversity and ecosystems. These changes in combination are threatening 
our ability to feed a growing global population. However, significant efforts are being made 
to change course. The Paris Agreement, the Sustainable Development Goals, technological 
advances, responsible business conduct and emerging recognition that everyone must take a 
share of the responsibility – these are all signs that change is possible.  
 
If the world shifts to a pathway that reduces greenhouse gas emissions and strengthens the 
carbon stock in forests and soils, protects ecosystems on which we all depend, and results in 
sustainable use of resources, this will alter the entire basis for development of our societies. It 
will involve a steady reduction of emissions from energy use, the production of goods and 
services, and the way people live and get around. We will have to develop integrated, 
sustainable systems for land use and environmental management. And these changes will 
have to take place while the global population is still growing.  
 
We are already beginning to have an idea of the level of costs we may face if the world does 
not succeed in achieving climate and environmental targets and the Sustainable Development 
Goals. We must recognise that we are experiencing a prolonged climate crisis that is a serious 
threat to both people and the environment. Scientists have confirmed that it is not too late to 
act, but we have very little time. The global transformation must start now, and every country 
must play its part.  
1 
  
A global transformation will be a challenging process, but will also offer many opportunities. 
The benefits of a global low-emission development pathway in line with the Paris Agreement 
will be far greater than the costs. This has been established in many international studies. In 
2006, the Stern Review1 concluded that the costs of not reducing global emissions would be 
far higher than the costs of taking action to cut emissions. Since then, the Global Commission 
on the Economy and Climate has published several studies with similar conclusions. The 
benefits of a low-emission future will also include towns that are pleasant to live and work in, 
with cleaner air and less congestion and crowding. New market opportunities will open up, 
and creativity and innovation will be stimulated. New products and services will create 
competitive jobs and result in value creation. 
 
However, a low-emission transformation will involve both social and economic costs. There 
will be changes in many industries, and employees will need adapt their skills and 
qualifications accordingly. Innovation and technology development, investments in 
infrastructure and action to facilitate change all involve costs.  
 
Norway’s ability to thrive will depend on the choices we and the rest of the world make now 
and in the time ahead. Decisions made today will determine what energy and transport 
systems, towns and buildings, forests and countryside are like in 2050. The way other 
countries develop their energy systems and spatial management systems will have a strong 
influence on conditions in Norway in 2050. But choices made by the Norwegian Government, 
the Storting (Norwegian parliament), and by municipalities and counties, the business sector 
and individuals in Norway – on resource use, spatial management and how and where to build 
and travel – will have major impacts on the situation in Norway in 2050. Norway’s target of 
becoming a low-emission society must therefore be made an integral part of the basis for 
decision making from now onwards. 
 
In planning for Norway’s transformation to a low-emission society, it will be vital to ensure 
that everyone is pulling in the same direction and that changes take place quickly enough for 
Norway to achieve its climate targets. It is a political responsibility to ensure that new 
opportunities can be used and help to ease the transition. Norway has a small, open economy 
and is dependent on technology development and markets in the rest of the world. This means 
that Norway cannot rely on a unilateral approach.  
 
And Norway is not on its own. The Paris Agreement reflects the understanding that global 
cooperation is essential to achieve the climate targets. All the parties to the agreement have 
 
1The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review, October 2006. 
2 
 therefore agreed to the global target of holding the increase in the global average temperature 
to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to limit the temperature 
increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. The Sustainable Development Goals, adopted by 
the UN in the same year as the Paris Agreement, reflect worldwide recognition that it is not 
possible to eliminate poverty, hunger and social disparities unless we also take steps to 
safeguard nature as the basis for our livelihoods and to halt climate change. The 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) and the Intergovernmental Science-
Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) have concluded that 
challenges in both these areas must be resolved to promote welfare improvements and social 
development for the world population. Global growth must be kept within safe ecological 
limits in order to maintain the capacity of natural systems to provide the ecosystem services 
on which we all depend.  
 
Norway will need to make wise choices during its transformation to a low-emission society, 
so that there is room for a wide variety of solutions within a stable long-term framework. This 
strategy presents the Government’s general priorities and important considerations for the 
pathway towards a low-emission society in 2050. The Government’s intention is to provide a 
stronger basis for its climate policy and predictable long-term structures that will enable all 
stakeholders to pull in the right direction.  
 
This strategy is Norway’s answer to the call for all countries to develop long-term low-
emission strategies, as set out in the Paris Agreement. Such strategies are additional to the 
emission reduction targets countries communicate in their binding nationally determined 
contributions (NDCs) under the Paris Agreement. This strategy does not, therefore, entail any 
new international commitments for Norway, but is based on the targets already set out in the 
Act relating to Norway’s climate targets (Climate Change Act). It is divided into three 
chapters. Chapter 1 describes the basis for a low-emission society and the global, regional and 
national starting point for a low-emission development pathway. Chapter 2 gives an account 
of Norway’s climate targets and describes what Norway will be like as a low-emission society 
in 2050 once these targets have been achieved. Chapter 3 describes the Government’s general 
priorities and important considerations for the pathway towards a low-emission society.  
 
 
1  The basis for a low-emission society   
1.1  The necessary low-emission society 
The 2015 Paris Agreement was adopted in recognition of the irreversible loss and damage 
being caused by climate change and the serious threat it poses to nature and society. Together 
with growing pressure on natural resources and land, accompanied by the loss of species and 
3 
 ecosystems and litter and other pollution, climate change is a serious threat to the world’s 
capacity to provide fundamental services such as clean water, sufficient food and safe homes. 
It is vital for the international community to succeed in curbing global warming.  
 
The Paris Agreement affirms global willingness to achieve a low-emission development 
pathway. At the Paris summit, the world’s countries agreed to the target of holding the 
increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C above pre-industrial levels and 
pursuing efforts to limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C. In order to achieve this long-term 
temperature target, countries agreed that they would aim to reach global peaking of 
greenhouse gas emissions as soon as possible, and to undertake rapid reductions after this in 
accordance with best available science, so as to achieve a balance between anthropogenic 
emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases in the second half of this 
century.   
 
All parties to the agreement must contribute to collective progress towards the temperature 
target. They do this by preparing, communicating and maintaining successive nationally 
determined contributions (NDCs) setting out the emission targets that they intend to achieve. 
Each country must carry out domestic mitigation measures with the aim of achieving its NDC. 
Each new NDC will represent progression beyond that country’s current NDC, and reflect the 
highest possible level of ambition. Thus, the Paris Agreement and its objectives provide a 
basis for action and an important starting point for climate policy in every country, including 
Norway.   
The NDCs so far communicated under the Paris Agreement are by no means sufficient to 
achieve the long-term temperature target. The next deadline, when all countries are to 
communicate new or updated emission commitments, is in 2020.In February 2020,  Norway   
updated and enhanceds its nationally determined contribution under the Paris Agreement to 
reduce emissions by at least 50 per cent and towards 55 per cent compared to 1990 levels by 
2030. .2 
 
The Paris Agreement also calls on countries to formulate and communicate long-term low 
greenhouse gas emission development strategies. A strategy of this kind can be used to 
establish and communicate an ambitious vision and a long-term horizon for a country’s short 
and medium-term climate targets and policies, including those communicated in their NDCs. 
It can also provide a more predictable political framework for a low-emission development 
pathway. Long-term low-emission strategies do not entail new targets or commitments under 
the Paris Agreement, and countries have not been asked to report on them. The provisions of 
the Paris Agreement on mitigation are being implemented in a changing world. In the period 
 
2 Norway submitted its enhanced NDC on 7th February 2020, strengthening its target from a 40 % reduction to a reduction of 
50 % and up to 55 % by 2030 compared to the 1990 level.  
4 
 up to 2050, circumstances outside international and domestic climate policy will also strongly 
influence low-emission development pathways. Predicting future developments always 
involves uncertainty, but it is nevertheless possible to outline some global trends up to 2050.   
 
The UN estimates that the world population will increase to nearly 10 billion by 2050. Most 
of the growth will be in what are now developing and middle-income countries. In Europe 
and North America, the proportion of older people will be higher than today. Economic 
growth will lift more people into a global middle class. A rising global population and 
economic growth suggest there will also be rising energy demand, more pressure on land for 
various purposes such as housing, infrastructure and food production, and higher 
consumption.  
Most of the growing global population will be urban dwellers. The number of people living in 
urban areas has risen from about 750 million in 1950 to about 4.2 billion today. According to 
the UN, urbanisation will continue. It is estimated that another 2.5 billion people could be 
urban dwellers by 2050. This would be the equivalent of building a new town of 1.6 million 
people every week from 2020 onwards.  
 
According to the UN Environment Programme (UNEP), the world is currently using 1.6 
planets’ worth of resources every year. This high level of consumption will result in resource 
scarcity in many important sectors and areas by 2050. Establishing a circular economy, in 
which resources are not wasted and the value of products and materials is maintained for as 
long as possible, is a way of counteracting resource scarcity.   
 
Both resource scarcity and climate change impacts will alter conditions for urban 
development up to 2050 in many parts of the world. In some regions, water will be in short 
supply. Many of the world’s largest cities are low lying and at risk from sea level rise, and 
will be affected by changing rainfall patterns and heatwaves. Many countries are therefore 
linking and integrating climate change mitigation and adaptation with sustainable 
development when developing their long-term low-emission strategies. 
In addition to a rapidly rising population and increasing pressure on resources and land, we 
are experiencing rapid technological development. Automation, robotisation and digitalisation 
are some of the technology trends that are likely to influence development pathways, working 
life and the ways people interact in the years ahead. Although the development of new 
technologies and business models may be driven by considerations other than climate change, 
these developments may also lead to reduced emissions and reduced and more efficient 
resource use.   
1.1.1  A global low-emission development pathway  
The world population has risen from 1 billion to more than 7 billion in the past 200 years. 
During the same time frame, people have been altering and putting pressure on many areas 
5 
 and ecosystems across the world. We have used large quantities of coal, oil and natural gas 
and extracted considerable volumes of metals and minerals. More than 70% of land areas that 
are not ice-covered are now directly influenced by human activities. The overall results 
include a substantial rise in the atmospheric concentration of CO  since pre-industrial times.3 
2
Greenhouse gas emissions have already altered the Earth’s climate. The world is warmer; 
global mean temperature has risen by about 1 oC relative to pre-industrial levels. Global sea 
levels have risen as snow and ice have melted. The oceans have become more acidic. The rise 
in global mean temperature has resulted in more frequent and more intense extreme weather 
events.  
 
In 2018, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) presented a report which 
concluded that limiting the rise in temperature to 1.5 oC would avoid the most serious impacts 
of global warming. Many of the risks to nature and society were found to be considerably 
lower for a temperature rise of 1.5 oC than for a rise of 2 oC.  
 
The aggregated NDCs so far communicated under the Paris Agreement are expected to result 
in global warming of about 3.2 oC relative to pre-industrial levels by the end of this century. 
This is nowhere near what is needed to achieve the Paris Agreement temperature target of 
holding global warming to well below 2°C below pre-industrial levels and pursuing efforts to 
limit the temperature rise to 1.5°C.  
 
According to the IPCC, the global warming trend and its impacts are not uniform throughout 
the world. Some areas are warming more than others, and the impacts will vary depending on 
geographical, topographical and other factors.  
 
The global rise in temperature could potentially have serious impacts on nature and society in 
all countries, although it is the poorest and most vulnerable countries that are most at risk. 
Conditions for agricultural, forestry, fisheries and aquaculture operations will alter as the 
climate changes. Rising sea levels, higher precipitation and more flooding may cause serious 
damage to infrastructure and property. Norway’s government-appointed Climate Risk 
Commission pointed out in its report4 that climate change is expected to curb worldwide 
economic growth and may increase the risk of political instability, humanitarian disasters and 
violent conflicts. Increased migration flows, unstable food prices, interruption/disruption of 
supplies and altered production and trade patterns may become important risk factors for the 
 
3Defined here as before 1850, in line with the IPCC Fifth Assessment Report. 
4 NOU 2018: 17 Summary Climate risk and the Norwegian economy 
6 
 international economy. For example, food and other goods produced in high-risk countries 
may become more expensive.   
 
The IPCC report Global Warming of 1.5°C concludes that it would be possible but 
challenging to limit global warming to 1.5°C. Achieving this would require rapid, deep cuts in 
emissions, and ambitious steps to enhance carbon dioxide removals by uptake in ecosystems. 
In emission trajectories where there is no or little overshoot of 1.5 oC warming, global 
greenhouse gas emissions are typically reduced by 40–50 % by 2030 compared with 2010. 
Emissions of CO  must be reduced to net zero by mid-century.5 Emissions of other 
2
greenhouse gases must also be reduced. 
 
Emissions from all major sectors, including energy, industry, transport, buildings and 
agriculture, forestry and other land use (AFOLU), will have to be reduced. AFOLU sectors 
will also have to play a part in enhancing removals of greenhouse gases. In relevant sectors, 
removals of CO  from the atmosphere can be used to compensate for residual emissions that 
2
are impossible to eliminate. This can for example be done using combustion of biomass in 
power plants combined with carbon capture and storage (bioenergy with CCS, or BECCS),6 
or steps can be taken to enhance removals in forest and other land categories. There are 
uncertainties relating to how emission reductions and increases in removals will be split 
between sectors, countries and regions, and what contributions can be expected from different 
technologies, solutions and methods. Nevertheless, some of the main features of a global low-
emission development pathway are clear, and are described in the IPCC’s assessment reports 
and special reports.7   
 
Fossil energy use accounts for the largest share of global greenhouse gas emissions. To 
achieve a development pathway in line with the Paris Agreement, it will therefore be 
necessary to make deep cuts in greenhouse gas emissions from fossil energy use. One feature 
of scenarios that give emission trajectories consistent with limiting global warming to both 2 
oC and 1.5 oC is that electricity production is practically emission-free by around mid-century. 
This means that it will be particularly important to make deep cuts in emissions from 
electricity production in the coming decades, both because this is currently a major emission 
source and because emission-free electricity will be needed to achieve cuts in other sectors. 
The IPCC states that further emission reductions that will needed to pursuing efforts to limit 
 
5
The term net zero is used to describe a situation where anthropogenic emissions are balanced by anthropogenic removals 
(for example by forest). 
6
Carbon capture and storage is a process in which carbon dioxide (CO2) from sources such as power plants or industry is 
separated (captured) and transported to a location for long-term storage (for example underground geological formations) 
instead of being released to the atmosphere.  
7IPCC 2014: IPCC Fifth Assessment Report (AR5); 2018: Global Warming of 1.5 oC; and 2019: Climate Change and Land  
7 
 the temperature increase to 1.5°C will have to be made mainly in the industry and transport 
sectors. 
 
Deforestation and forest degradation and agriculture and other land use are both major sources 
of greenhouse gas emissions, together accounting for about one fourth of global 
anthropogenic emissions. Enhancing CO  removals in forest, reducing deforestation and forest 
2
degradation, and using biomass sustainably to replace fossil energy and products are all part 
of the solution. However, the IPCC emphasises in its report that land is a very limited 
resource. Mitigation measures that require large areas of land may result in conflicts between 
different policy objectives and require trade-offs between climate policy and other interests.   
 
Emissions from transport and industry will have to be substantially reduced. Industrial sectors 
will need to develop and deploy low-emission technologies and renewable raw materials and 
become more effective. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) will be a necessary option for 
residual emissions that cannot be eliminated by using emission-free alternatives or 
technological advances. A low-emission pathway in the transport sector will require greater 
use of zero-emission solutions such as biogas, hydrogen and electrification. The transition can 
be helped by reducing transport needs and improving efficiency. Sound land-use planning, 
more effective goods transport, greater use of public transport, cycling and walking and new 
innovative mobility solutions will all be needed as part of the approach.  
 
It is also essential to put in place the enabling conditions for a low-emission development 
pathway. There must be a shift towards sustainable solutions for investment, technology, 
material and energy use and consumption. This will require sound planning and policy 
instruments to ensure that long-term investment decisions taken in the near future do not lock 
in high emissions, making it more difficult to achieve a low-emission pathway. At the same 
time, it is important that this approach has broad public support. 
 
There is general agreement that pricing greenhouse gas emissions is vital if we are to achieve 
a cost-effective low-emission development pathway. Global consensus had been reached on 
this as long ago as 1992, when the Climate Change Convention was adopted. The polluter-
pays-principle was therefore incorporated into the Convention. Putting a price on emissions 
gives incentives to reduce emissions, improve efficiency and develop and deploy low-
emission technologies.   
 
Innovation and technology development will also be essential. The prospects of achieving 
climate policy targets and the costs of doing so will depend on the availability of 
environmental technology and the mitigation effects it provides. It will be necessary to deploy 
8 
 technologies that are already available at scale, continue to develop and implement others that 
are not yet commercially available, and develop completely new technologies. 
 
Most of the pathways8 that describe emission trajectories consistent with limiting global 
warming to 1.5 degrees include CCS to reduce emissions from industry and power generation 
that are difficult to deal with in any other way. Many pathways also include carbon dioxide 
removal (CDR), i.e. removal of CO  from the atmosphere through afforestation and bioenergy 
2
with carbon capture and storage (BECCS). This will require considerable areas of land and 
may have serious adverse impacts on the environment. It is therefore uncertain to what extent 
it will be practicable or environmentally sound to make large-scale use of CDR. However, 
this approach may be a necessary part of the solution if cuts in greenhouse gas emissions are 
not rapid enough. The more quickly the world reduces emissions, the less need there will be 
for CDR.  
 
Behaviour patterns and lifestyle choices are important drivers of emissions globally. A 
sustainable lifestyle and behavioural patterns, including lower material consumption, a 
healthy diet and lower demand for transport, will reduce emissions and ease the transition to a 
low-emission pathway. This is true of the parts of the world and population segments that are 
not poor. The IPCC report Climate Change and Land points out that the global food system 
accounts for 21–37 % of total net anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions. It will be possible 
to achieve vital sustainable development goals and at the same time reduce emissions, not 
only by changing the way the agricultural sector operates but also by changing the way we 
store food and through dietary choices and steps to reduce food waste.9  
 
The success of a transition to a low-emission pathway will both influence and be influenced 
by the extent to which the world achieves other global objectives such as the UN Sustainable 
Development Goals (SDGs). According to the IPCC report Global Warming of 1.5°C, a 
global emission trajectory consistent with warming of 1.5 °C will have positive effects on 
progress towards other SDGs, especially those on good health, clean energy for all, 
sustainable cities and communities, responsible consumption and production and life below 
water. The report also identifies potential conflicts between policy objectives and trade-offs 
that may be necessary, for example between mitigation options and efforts to eradicate hunger 
and poverty and provide clean water and access to energy. Fewest trade-offs will be needed in 
a low-emission pathway where energy needs and consumption are low and the emission 
intensity of the food system is also low.10  
 
8
IPCC, 2018: Global Warming of 1.5 oC. Summary for Policymakers, Figure SPM.3b. 
9IPCC 2019: Climate Change and Land, Summary for Policymakers, B.2.3. 
10IPCC 2019: Climate Change and Land, Summary for Policymakers, B.2.1, B.2.3. 
9 
 Knowledge base 
The IPCC’s reports are considered to provide the best available knowledge base for 
developing climate policy. The IPCC assesses and reviews relevant scientific papers on 
climate change, its impacts and possible climate change adaptation and mitigation measures. 
The panel evaluates published scientific literature, but does not conduct its own research.  
 
The special reports Climate Change and Land and Global Warming of 1.5°C are the IPCC’s 
most recent and up-to-date reports. The IPCC will continue to publish assessments in the 
years ahead, starting with another special report on the ocean and cryosphere in autumn 2019.   
 
It is vital that Norway’s climate policy is based on the best available scientific knowledge on 
climate change and emissions globally, and especially on the work of the IPCC, which is the 
foundation for global climate cooperation under the Climate Change Convention.  
 
1.1.2  Circumstances, opportunities and challenges for Norway  
A low-emission development pathway in line with the Paris Agreement will entail both 
opportunities and challenges for all countries, including Norway. Global trends have a major 
impact on developments in a small open economy like Norway’s. Ensuring full, effective use 
of labour and other resources will be vital in Norway’s transition to a low-emission society. 
 
The transition to a low-emission society has to take the current level of emissions as its point 
of departure. As in other OECD countries, the level of emissions is high in Norway today. In 
2018, per capita emissions in Norway were about 10 tonnes CO -eq. By way of comparison, 
2
the average levels in 2017 were 11.9 and 8.8 tonnes CO -eq respectively for the OECD 
2
countries and the EU,11 while the world average was about 6.5 tonnes CO -eq.12 Emissions in 
2
different sectors are an important starting point for the path towards a low-emission society. 
 
 
 
 
Figur 1.1 GHG Emissions by sector, 1990-2019 
 
11Eurostat, 2017, Greenhouse gas emissions per capita, European Environment Agency. 
12
The global estimate is based on 1) emission figures for 2017 from UNEP (2018) Emissions Gap Report 2018 and 2) 
population figures from the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (2017): World Population Prospects: The 2017 
Revision  
10 
 25
s
t 20
n
e
la
v
iu 15
q
e
-
2
O
C 10
 s
n
o
t
 n 5
o
illiM
0
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Transport, fishing, motor equip. etc Oil and gas extraction
Manufacturing industries and mining Energy supply
Agriculture Heating in other industries and households
Other
 
              Source: Norwegian Environmental Agency 
 
Norway is in a strong position for the transition to a low-emission pathway. Participation in 
the labour market is high, and there are abundant natural resources, a skilled workforce and 
sound state revenues. People in the Norwegian workforce are generally well-qualified and 
productive. This is a good starting point for making use of new knowledge and new 
technology. 
 
Wealth is more equally distributed in Norway than in most other countries. Most people have 
the resources and freedom to plan their lives according to their own views and wishes. The 
low level of inequality means that people generally trust each other and the public authorities. 
This makes cooperation easier, whether in the business sector, in working life or in the public 
sector. It also gives individual people a feeling of security and a sense of belonging, and 
results in social and political stability. Welfare schemes provide a safety net that reduces risks 
for the individual, and can make people more willing to be creative and innovative. This 
situation is positive both for general social development and the Norwegian economy, and is a 
good starting point for the transition to a low-emission society.  
 
However, Norway will have to deal with a number of challenges in the years ahead. As in the 
rest of northern Europe, there will be an ageing population in the period up to 2050. This may 
influence on Norway’s prospects of achieving a low-emission transition involving rapid 
11 
 technological change, and will mean that a lower proportion of the population is in 
employment.  
 
One of the main challenges for Norway in the time ahead will be to adjust to a new situation 
where it is more similar to Western economies that do not have oil and gas resources. Growth 
will have to take place in sectors where there is no economic resource rent. This means that 
tax revenues will be lower and companies cannot expect as high a return on their capital as in 
the petroleum sector. Fullfilment  of the Paris Agreement , may result in lower demand for 
energy based on fossil sources and may thus reduce the value of the remaining oil and gas on 
the Norwegian continental shelf. The value of Norway’s oil and gas is also affected by many 
other factors, including energy demand and the relative costs of developing new energy 
resources. 
 
The transition to a low-emission society will alter the conditions for business and industry and 
will require changes in every country, including Norway. The Norwegian economy and 
business sector have been through major restructuring processes before. The industrial 
structure has changed radically in the past 40–50 years. Changing economic conditions, 
including the development of new technology and alterations in demand and competitive 
conditions, mean that some companies and industries will grow while others become less 
important. Even though many people will continue in their current line of work, some 
industries and workplaces will be vulnerable in a global low-emission future. Adaptability 
will be essential, and people and groups in some areas of the economy are likely to find that 
they need different qualifications or that there are fewer opportunities for employment. 
 
Norway is pursuing an ambitious climate policy together with the European Union. Norway 
has undertaken to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by at least 40% by 2030 compared 
with the reference year 1990 in cooperation with Iceland and European Union13. This is 
Norway’s first contribution to implementation of the Paris Agreement for the period 2021–
2030, and the emission reduction target was made legally binding in the Climate Change Act. 
In October 2019, the European Union, Iceland and Norway formally agreed to cooperate on 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 40% by 2030. 
 
On 7 February 2020, Norway updated and enhanced its nationally determined contribution 
(NDC) under the Paris Agreement, committing to emission reductions of at least 50% and up 
to 55% by 2030 compared to the 1990 level. Norway is seeking to fulfil its enhanced ambition 
through its cooperation on climate action with the EU. In the event that Norway's enhanced 
nationally determined contribution goes beyond the target set in the EU’s next NDC, Norway 
 
13 Norway submitted its enhanced NDC on 7th February 2020, strengthening its target from a 40% reduction to a reduction 
of 50 % and up to 55 % by 2030 compared to the 1990 level. 
12 
 intends to use voluntary cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement to fulfil the part 
that goes beyond what is fulfilled through the climate cooperation with the European Union. 
 
Through the cooperation with the EU and Iceland, Norway will also take part in EU climate 
legislation in the period 2012–2030. This will be an important part of the framework for 
Norway’s climate policy and ensure a shift to a low-emission pathway in line with 
neighbouring countries. Norway has generally close links with the EU, which is our most 
important trade partner. For example, the Nordic and European power markets are becoming 
more and more closely integrated, both in regulatory terms through the EEA Agreement and 
physically as new interconnectors are built to increase transmission capacity between 
countries. Closer integration between the Norwegian and European power supply systems will 
increase the value of Norway’s flexible hydropower, and make it easier to import electricity in 
dry years and periods when Norway has an electricity deficit. Power trade and exchange 
provides flexibility that will be an advantage as the power system is developed further. 
Cooperation in this field therefore benefits all parties and supports the shift to a low-emission 
development pathway. 
 
As the world makes progress towards the long-term goal of the Paris Agreement, it will be 
important to shift production to goods and services that are competitive as the price of 
emissions rises, stricter regulation of emissions is introduced and consumer preferences 
change. Companies that are able to produce goods or services with low or zero emissions of 
greenhouse gases will be the winners in this situation. Technology development, resource 
efficiency, better use of energy, more use of renewable raw materials and input factors, and 
circular solutions and waste management will all be important elements in this green 
transformation. In many industries, a long-term focus on technology development and 
dissemination will be needed.  
 
Climate change will have impacts in Norway. According to the report Climate in Norway 
2100,14 the annual temperature in Norway is expected to rise by 3.3–6.4 oC, which is more 
than the expected rise in global mean annual temperature. Other expected changes include 
higher precipitation, more frequent and more intense extreme rainfall, more frequent rain-
induced flooding and more frequent landslides and avalanches. In Svalbard, the mean 
temperature may rise from minus 8–9 oC to plus 1–2 oC by the end of the century if emissions 
continue to rise at the present rate.15 
 
14
Norwegian Climate Service Centre (2015): Climate in Norway 2100 (condensed version of the Norwegian report Klima i 
Norge 2100).   
15Norwegian Climate Service Centre (2019): Climate in Svalbard 2100. This rise is estimated under the RCP8.5 scenario 
used in the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report. This is a scenario in which the world as a whole fails to curb growth and reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
13 
  
In its 2018 report, the Climate Risk Commission assessed both the transition risk for Norway, 
in other words the risks associated with implementing global climate policy, and physical 
risks, or the risks associated with a changing climate. The Commission emphasised that global 
factors are important to a small country like Norway. In its assessment of physical risk, the 
Commission highlighted the fact that climate change impacts in other countries can pose a 
risk to the Norwegian economy. As regards transition risk, the Commission pointed out that 
successful implementation of global climate policy or major technological advances may 
reduce the value of Norway’s remaining petroleum reserves. 
 
However, the Commission concluded that Norway is less vulnerable to climate change than 
most other countries, and one of the countries with greatest adaptive capacity. Exposure to 
direct adverse impacts of climate change is generally lower in developed countries than in 
poor developing countries. In addition, countries like Norway generally have better-
functioning institutions, a higher level of education and a more diversified business sector. 
Higher income levels and flexible labour markets also give greater capacity to absorb the 
costs of a transition to a low-emission society. 
   
14 
  
2  A low-emission future 
2.1  Norway’s climate targets  
Clear, ambitious climate targets provide a predictable basis for a low-emission development 
pathway for the authorities, municipalities, the business sector and individual people. 
Norway’s climate targets for 2030 and 2050 are set out in the Act relating to Norway’s 
climate targets (Climate Change Act). The purpose of the Act is to promote the 
implementation of Norway’s climate targets as part of its process of transformation into a 
low-emission society by 2050. 
  
Norway has undertaken to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions by at least 40% by 2030 
compared with the reference year 1990. This is Norway’s first contribution to implementation 
of the Paris Agreement for the period 2021–2030, and the target was established by law in the 
Climate Change Act .  In October 2019, the European Union, Iceland and Norway formally 
agreed to cooperate on fulfilling their respective greenhouse gas emission reduction targets by 
203016. Cooperating with the EU on climate policy can help to ensure a cost-effective 
transformation process and equal conditions of competition for businesses in Norway and the 
EU. The agreement between Norway, Iceland and the EU on cooperation to fulfil the 2030 
climate targets means that Norway will not only take part in the Emissions Trading System 
(EU ETS) but also in action under the Effort Sharing Regulation (for non-ETS emissions)17 
and under the Regulation on land use, land use change and forestry (LULUCF).  
 
In its political platform, the current Government announced that it would draw up a plan for 
achieving Norway’s climate commitments, including action to cut non-ETS emissions within 
Norway by 45%, once an agreement with the EU on joint fulfilment of climate targets was in 
place. This target was to be for 2030 and relative to 2005. The Government’s aim was to 
achieve this reduction through domestic measures, and it was making plans to this end. If 
strictly necessary, Norway could make use of the EU flexibility mechanisms. 
 
The Government’s political platform also states that ambitions for cutting non-ETS emissions 
will be specified by sector, and will include halving emissions from the transport sector by 
2030 compared with the 2005 level. This target is based on the assumption that technological 
advances will be made in various segments of the transport sector. The Government has also 
 
16 The Agreement between the EU, Iceland and Norway relates to the emission reduction target of at least 40 % reduction by 
2030. Norway also seeks to fulfil the enhanced target through climate cooperation with the EU.  
17
Emissions covered by the Effort Sharing Regulation are largely from transport, agriculture, waste and heating buildings, 
and also include some emissions from industry and the oil and gas sector.  
15 
 adopted an action plan for green shipping in which it announced the ambition of reducing 
emissions from domestic shipping and fishing vessels by half by 2030. In addition, the 
Government and the agricultural organisations have signed a letter of intent agreeing to work 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and enhance carbon uptake. A target of reducing 
emissions by 5 million tonnes CO -eq has been set for the period 2021–2030. 
2
 
Norway’s target of being a low-emission society by 2050 has been made legally binding in 
the Climate Change Act. The Act describes a low-emission society as one where greenhouse 
gas emissions, on the basis of the best available scientific knowledge, global emission trends 
and national circumstances, have been reduced in order to avert adverse impacts of global 
warming, as described in the Paris Agreement. In quantitative terms, the target is to achieve 
emission reductions of the order of 80–95% from the level in the reference year 1990. In its 
political platform, the Government has agreed to strengthen the target to emission reductions 
of the order of 90–95% and to propose that the Parliament amends the Climate Change Act 
accordingly to reflect this. The effect of Norway’s participation in the EU ETS is to be taken 
into account in assessing progress towards this target. This means that the contribution made 
by the ETS sector in Norway to emission reductions in Europe through its participation in the 
EU ETS is to be included when assessing progress towards the 2050 target. The Climate 
Change Act does not preclude joint fulfilment with the EU of the target of Norway becoming 
a low-emission society by 2050. 
 
The costs Norway incurs in achieving a particular climate target will depend on technological 
developments globally. These are uncertain and will depend partly on the extent to which the 
rest of the world pursues an ambitious climate policy. If most larger countries gradually 
introduce ambitious climate policies, effective, low-cost technologies to replace energy based 
on fossil fuels with renewable energy will be developed much more rapidly. 
 
2.2  Everyone is working towards the climate targets  
The whole of society must be involved if we are to succeed in the low-emission 
transformation. Central government, counties and municipalities, the business sector, research 
institutes, voluntary organisations and individuals all have important roles to play in 
developing a low-emission society. Although each of us will have to plan our own activities 
so that they are compatible with a low-emission pathway, cooperation and coordination will 
be essential to ensure that everyone is pulling in the same direction. 
 
In their policy development, the authorities must use instruments and tools that give 
incentives consistent with the target of achieving a low-emission society by 2050. In Chapter 
1.3 of this strategy, the Government sets out general priorities and important considerations 
16 
 for developing a policy and policy instruments to promote the transformation to a low-
emission society by 2050.  
 
The businesses and industries will play an important part in developing and deploying low-
emission technologies and solutions. Business and industry must help to bring about cuts in 
Norway’s greenhouse gas emissions while maintaining high value creation and employment 
levels. The transformation process will require the business sector to adjust to competing in a 
low-emission future. Businesses included in the EU ETS will, like businesses in the EU, have 
to change within a system where very few emission allowances will be issued by 2050 and 
new allowances will cease to be issued soon after 2050, assuming that the EU continues to 
maintain the rules for linear reduction of the emission cap. It will therefore be essential to 
urgently initiate technology development in areas with long timelines for technological 
change.  
 
Reporting on climate risk can raise companies’ awareness of the types of climate-related risks 
and opportunities they may face. In its 2018 report, the Climate Risk Commission pointed out 
that it is important for businesses to improve their understanding of climate risk so that they 
have a stronger basis for decision making and can ensure that investment decisions are more 
robust in the face of greater uncertainty. The Commission also highlighted how important it is 
for financial market participants to have a sound understanding of climate risk in different 
sectors and economic activities. 
 
Business and industry have already begun the process of transformation. Since 2016, 16 
sectors have drawn up roadmaps for green competitiveness. These describe each sector’s 
goals, visions and plans for reducing or eliminating greenhouse gas emissions by 2050 while 
at the same time increasing value creation and assuring employment.  
Box 2.1 The Norwegian Process Industries’ Roadmap – combining growth 
and zero emissions by 2050  
In 2016, the Norwegian process industries drew up a roadmap describing their vision for 
developing a competitive sector combined with zero emissions in 2050. The roadmap 
identifies technologies the sector believes it will be possible to implement by 2050, provided 
that the sector is operating within a stable long-term and globally competitive policy 
framework.   
These include:  
•  carbon capture and utilisation (CCU); 
•  greater use of biomass in processes and products; 
•  greater use of hydrogen as a reducing agent and energy carrier; 
•  technological breakthroughs in zero-carbon process technologies such as inert 
anodes;  
17 
 •  new production methods that use less energy and generate lower emissions; 
•  utilising by-product streams for new products; 
•  developing inputs and products that have a low carbon footprint during both 
production and use.  
Source: Federation of Norwegian Industries (2016): The Norwegian Process Industries’ Roadmap – 
combining growth and zero emissions by 2050 (Summary in English)  
 
The municipalities and counties have wide responsibilities – they provide services, exercise 
authority and purchase large quantities of goods and services. They also have a substantial 
property portfolio. Municipal and county authorities are responsible for spatial planning to 
provide areas that are attractive both to live in and for business development. This means that 
the municipalities and counties are at the heart of the low-emission transformation process. 
Their role as planners is particularly important. Almost all decisions municipalities make on 
the siting and design of commercial activities, homes, infrastructure and services have long-
lasting effects on energy use and emissions.  
 
Land-use management by the municipalities influences the capacity of land to absorb and 
store carbon. Some land-use change, for example deforestation and development of peatlands, 
will increase emissions from these areas. Unless municipalities ensure that planning for a low-
emission development pathway is an integral part of their activities, there is a risk of locking 
in a high level of emissions for many years, making it difficult and unnecessarily costly to 
achieve climate targets. It is therefore essential to use a long-term approach in both spatial and 
general planning processes, take climate change into account, and facilitate a low-emission 
pathway.  
 
The municipalities and counties are major purchasers of goods and services. They can include 
requirements relating to the climate and environmental footprint in procurement processes, 
thus reducing their own emissions and also encouraging the development of zero- and low-
emission solutions. For example, since 2017 the City of Oslo has required its own 
construction sites to be fossil-free, and is now testing whether it can also require them to be 
emission-free.18 A number of municipalities have invested in zero-emission vehicles and 
abatement technology at waste management sites. The counties are partly responsible for 
public transport services, and have been using requirements in procurement processes to 
promote the development and use of zero-emission solutions in this field. The Norwegian 
Public Roads Administration has also been playing a leading role, for example by pioneering 
the development and testing of new low-emission technologies for ferries.  
 
18 An emission-free construction site uses energy sources that do not result in emissions of CO2-eq or NOx at the site. (From 
DNV GL (2018): Guide to arranging fossil- and emission-free solutions on building sites). 
18 
  
Everyone living in Norway also has a part to play in shaping a low-emission society through 
their daily choices and activities. The way we get around, the way we live, and the goods and 
services we buy influence Norway’s emissions, and also emissions outside the country’s 
borders. Consumers can promote low-emission solutions by creating a demand for low-
emission goods and services. Employees can use their skills in creating a green, competitive 
labour market. Children and young people who have not yet entered the workforce can use 
educational and vocational choices to shape their own opportunities. People who are already 
in the labour force will need to use and expand their skills through new tasks, new jobs or new 
qualifications. 
 
Voluntary work plays a significant role in Norway. It is an important basis for an inclusive 
society that maintains the local environment and provides a good quality of life for everyone. 
The voluntary sector can also play an important part in achieving a low-emission development 
pathway. Many of the larger organisers of sports and cultural events are leading the way in 
seeking to make their events as green and sustainable as possible. Sports, neighbourhood and 
cultural associations and societies often organise systems for lending, swapping and buying 
second-hand equipment. Voluntary workers are also a vital part of Norway’s emergency 
response. This will become even more important because climate change may increase the 
risks associated with certain outdoor activities. In addition, the environmental organisations 
are largely voluntary, and are one of the most important drivers of a low-emission 
development pathway in Norway. They bring together many voices for climate and the 
environment, and are able to generate enthusiasm, highlight what is needed and demonstrate 
solutions. 
Box 2.2 Children and young people today – adults in 2050  
The Ministry of Climate and Environment invited representatives of children’s and youth 
organisations to a meeting on 11 June 2019 to provide input on what a low-emission society 
should be like and how to achieve this. They described a low-emission society in 2050 as 
emission-free, safe and resilient, with innovative local communities and towns. These were 
the main points:  
•  Resources are valuable assets: we repair things, and share and recycle them.  
•  The right choices are easy to make: there are systems and labelling schemes that 
encourage and support green behaviour and help us all to make sustainable 
choices. The municipalities provide systems for recycling, waste separation at 
source, managing plastic waste, etc. 
•  Quality is more important than quantity: products are manufactured sustainably, quality 
is high and they are durable.  
•  We value nature highly: we spend more time together in the outdoors. Our local forest 
and countryside is accessible to everyone, with marked paths.  
•  We make green travel choices: we generally spend our holidays locally, but when we 
do travel, green modes of travel are easy, attractive and inexpensive to use. There 
19 
 is infrastructure for cycling, walking and public transport both in and outside 
towns. All cars are zero-emission, and we use high-speed trains more often than 
planes. We still travel abroad, but more of our travel and holiday trips are in 
Norway. 
•  We have green jobs: jobs in the oil and gas sector have not been replaced by jobs in 
one specific sector – many sectors are involved. We have used Norway’s advanced 
skills and knowledge from the petroleum sector to develop green industries and 
workplaces, for example in fisheries, shipping and offshore wind.  
•  We are generous and show solidarity: Norway shares its wealth with parts of the world 
that are exposed and vulnerable to climate change.  
•  Our diet is healthy and climate-friendly, and we eat food that is sustainably and 
locally produced. 
 
2.3  Norway – a low-emission society in 2050  
Norway’s transition to a low-emission society will be dependent on a similar shift globally if 
it is to maintain its ability to make full, effective use of labour and other resources and 
achieve its climate and environmental policy goals. If global emissions in the years ahead do 
not approach a pathway consistent with achieving the long-term temperature target of the 
Paris Agreement, the development of low-emission technologies could be slow. This would 
result in high costs for reducing emissions in Norway, and make it more difficult to achieve 
Norway’s climate targets. At the same time, it would become more urgent to adapt to the 
effects of a changing climate, such as extreme weather events and flooding, and the costs of 
doing so will rise. However, if global emissions are in line with the long-term temperature 
target of the Paris Agreement, emissions in Norway will also be low in all sectors. 
Considering the uncertainties ahead, the Climate Change Act describes a low-emission 
society as ‘one where greenhouse gas emissions, on the basis of the best available scientific 
knowledge, global emission trends and national circumstances, have been reduced in order to 
avert adverse impacts of global warming’ as described in the Paris Agreement. The effect of 
Norway’s participation in the EU ETS is to be taken into account in assessing progress 
towards this target. 
 
Describing the future is always an exercise in uncertainty, regardless of whether we are 
looking five, ten or fifty years ahead. Descriptions of the future are always based on 
circumstances at the time when they are made. It is now 30 years till we reach 2050. With 
such a long time horizon, it is not possible to give a correct or complete picture of what 
Norwegian society will be like. Even assuming that the world as a whole and Norway have 
achieved their climate targets by 2050, and that Norway has become a low-emission society, 
it is uncertain how the remaining emissions will be split between sectors and which 
technologies will have been successful. There are many other factors not related to the climate 
policy framework that will also play a part in determining what a low-emission society is like 
in 2050. These add to the level of uncertainty of descriptions of a low-emission future for the 
world as a whole and for Norway.  
20 
  
Assuming that by 2050, the global emission pathway is in line with the long-term temperature 
target of the Paris agreement and that Norway has achieved its climate targets, Norway will 
be a low-emission society with the following general characteristics:  
•  Emissions are low in all sectors. 
•  Forest and other land categories and natural resources are managed sustainably and in 
a way that promotes removals and minimises emissions of greenhouse gases. 
Norway’s land and water act as carbon sinks and supply the population with 
materials, food and energy.  
•  The business sector is green, with low greenhouse gas emissions. 
•  Cities and communities are designed to minimise greenhouse gas emissions and 
provide good living conditions for their inhabitants.  
Low emissions in all sectors 
By 2050, Norway and other countries have achieved low emissions in all sectors. This means 
that energy and resource efficiency are high and a circular economy underpins low-emission, 
sustainable production and consumption.  
 
As a result of technological advances, the transport sector is using zero- and low-emission 
solutions for passenger cars, public transport and heavy goods vehicles. Transport needs have 
been reduced by developing more compact cities and communities and new digital 
communication solutions. Passenger and freight transport has been made more effective. 
Sound land-use planning, greater use of public transport, cycling and walking and new, 
innovative transport solutions have all played a part in this. There have been similar 
developments in the shipping and maritime transport sector.  
 
Emissions from goods and products supplied by Norwegian industry are low. This has been 
achieved by electrification, switching from fossil to renewable raw materials, introducing 
low- and zero-emission technology and using carbon capture and storage (CCS). Circular 
value chains are the norm.  
 
The agricultural sector is supplying safe, healthy food, and agricultural resources are being 
used wisely. Greenhouse gas emissions from agriculture have been reduced and carbon 
fixation has been enhanced. New technology makes optimal application of fertiliser possible, 
thus reducing emissions. More widespread use of zero-emission vehicles has reduced the need 
for  based on renewable energy sources, and autonomous vehicles are in use, making farming 
operations more effective. Manure is used to produce biogas, replacing energy based on fossil 
fuels in both agriculture and other sectors, and at the same time cutting emissions from 
livestock. Improvements in breeding programmes and feeding are also reducing emissions 
21 
 from livestock. These improvements are being enhanced by more sustainable land use, cuts in 
food waste, new technology and a trend towards a healthier diet with a higher proportion of 
plant-based foods, all of which reduce greenhouse gas emissions further.  
 
Forests are used sustainably in 2050, increasing CO  uptake and storage, and also supply 
2
renewable raw materials to replace energy based on fossil fuels and materials. Forest 
management has been improved to enhance CO  removals and to ensure that forests are better 
2
adapted to climate change. Use of forest resources is being combined with protection and 
conservation measures to ensure that forestry is sustainable and that biodiversity and 
ecosystem services are maintained. A large proportion of felled timber is used for durable 
products such as building materials, and residues and by-products are valued and used to a 
much larger extent than today. New technology and business models make it possible to use 
forest biomass for a variety of purposes, for example to replace soybeans in animal fodder, 
fish feed, bioplastics and clothes and other textiles. Forests are also an important source of 
bioenergy, which is replacing energy based on fossil fuels. Effective, sustainable land use and 
densification of built-up areas has reduced emissions from deforestation, peatland 
development and other types of land-use change to low levels. Forests are being managed is 
in a way that gives long-term high levels of carbon removals, strengthens the carbon stock 
and maintains forests as a source of climate and environmentally friendly energy and raw 
materials.  
A diversified economy and green competitiveness  
By 2050, Norway has developed a green business sector by making use of the opportunities 
offered by a global transition to a low-emission development pathway. High demand for low- 
and zero-emission technology and low-emission products provides a basis for greening of 
business and industry. Norway has a diversified economy and a rich natural resource base. 
Participation in working life is high and the workforce is skilled.  
 
There are many similarities between companies that are succeeding in 2050 and those that 
were successful before the low-emission transition. They supply products and services that are 
in demand at competitive prices. And they are able to compete under conditions that favour 
low-emission solutions, both in Norway and elsewhere.  
 
Business and industry makes widespread use of smart, innovative, green and competitive 
solutions. Norway’s resource base is an important driver of industrial development. Its forests, 
renewable energy sources and mineral resources provide important inputs for a global low-
emission economy. Norway is still one of the world’s leading energy nations. Ocean resources 
play a key role, and the oceans produce food for a growing global population. Norway is also 
still an important maritime nation, and has industries that supply high-tech low- or zero-
emission maritime transport solutions. Nevertheless, the country’s most important asset is its 
highly qualified and skilled workforce.  
22 
 Climate-smart cities and communities and a high quality of life  
Cities and communities are attractive and climate-friendly, provide good, safe living 
conditions and workplaces and encourage an active, healthy lifestyle. The air is cleaner, and 
more public transport is available both within and outside towns. In addition, there is good 
walking and cycling infrastructure.  
 
Norway’s cities and communities have been made more attractive by upgrading meeting 
places and public spaces. Existing public spaces and buildings have been given new life 
through innovative use. Outside the larger towns, communities have dynamic centres with a 
good balance between residential areas, commercial activities and workplaces. Footpaths and 
cycle paths, green spaces and outdoor recreation areas have been combined with easy access 
to cultural activities, workplaces, school and other activities. Even though it is not possible for 
everyone to walk or cycle to work and school, zero-emission vehicles and better public 
transport have more or less eliminated emissions from passenger transport. 
 
Densification of urban areas reduces the need for building on undeveloped land that can 
instead serve as carbon sinks. This is being done in a way that takes into account the need for 
green spaces, promotes people’s well-being and results in dynamic cities and communities. 
There has been a focus on energy efficiency in both new and existing buildings, and resources 
and energy are now being used more efficiently than before.  
 
New technologies and climate-smart solutions are an integral part of everyone’s lives, 
whether they live in the cities or in rural areas. The sharing economy and new business 
models have made it more normal to lease or rent – for example, people tend to share 
products and services that are not used all the time, such as cars, holiday cabins, boats and 
some tools. Products are increasingly designed for durability and to be possible to recycle. 
They are also designed so that they can be repaired, and manufacturers’ business models put 
more emphasis on repair and recycling. More widespread use of digital communication allows 
more flexibility in where people work from, reduces the need for transport and gives people 
more free time.  
 
   
23 
  
3  The pathway to a low-emission society  
3.1  Strategic priorities for the pathway to a low-emission society  
Norway is pursuing an ambitious climate policy, and will continue to do so. The 
Government’s long-term target is for Norway to be a low-emission society by 2050 where 
resource use is efficient and the business and industry is competitive.  
In its political platform, the Government announced its intention of restructuring the 
Norwegian economy and contributing to Norway’s transformation into a low-emission society 
by mid-century. This process must also result in a development pathway that safeguards 
biodiversity and builds a sustainable welfare-based society.  
 
To promote the transformation of Norway into a low-emission society, the Government is 
required to submit updated climate targets to the Storting (Norwegian parliament) in 2020 and 
every five years after that. These will be based on the best available science and, as far as 
possible, will be quantitative and measurable. The climate targets are to represent a 
progression from the preceding targets and promote a gradual transformation in the period up 
to 2050.  
 
Norway’s climate and environmental policy must be designed to ensure that the country 
achieves its climate and environmental targets. To minimise conflict between climate targets 
and goals in other policy areas, the use of policy instruments needs to be closely coordinated. 
The Norwegian Government’s climate policy is therefore based on the following:  
•  The polluter-pays principle. Policy instruments should be chosen on the principle that 
anyone who causes pollution or environmental damage must pay for the damage 
they cause. 
•  Policy instruments must be effective. Environmental taxes, emissions trading, direct 
regulation, agreements, information and subsidies must be combined as effectively 
as possible.  
•  Support for technology development. The development and deployment of 
environmental technology and climate and environmentally friendly energy 
technology is important in addressing climate and environmental problems, and 
can also open up new market opportunities for Norwegian business and industry. 
•  Global effects are of crucial importance. Norway’s climate policy instruments must 
play a part in reducing global emissions.  
•  A low-emission society, not a low-income society. Policy instruments should be designed 
to achieve environmental targets as reliably as possible and at the lowest possible 
cost to society. We must make full use of the opportunities offered by a green 
shift in the economy.  
 
24 
 In addition, the target of Norway becoming  a low-emission society by 2050 must be taken 
into account in land-use planning, infrastructure development and public investment.  
Using its climate policy principles and its intention of making climate policy progressively 
stricter as a starting point, the Government will provide a suitable framework for Norway to 
become a low-emission society by 2050. It will use a variety of tools including monitoring 
progress towards targets and pricing emissions to promote a low-emission development 
pathway for business and industry, local government and individuals. Steps to strengthen and 
adjust climate policy in the years up to 2050 will be in line with the Climate Change Act and 
in accordance with the Paris Agreement communicate a nationally determined contribution 
every five years, representing progression beyond its current goals and reflecting the highest 
possible level of ambition. 
Box 3.1 2030 – an important milestone on the path towards a low-emission 
society  
Under the Paris Agreement, Norway has updated and enhanced its nationally determined 
contribution under the Paris Agreement.to reduce its emissions by at least 50 % and up to 55 
% by 2030 compared to 1990 levels.  
Norway’s first NDC under the Paris Agreement was to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions 
by at least 40 % by 2030 compared with the reference year 1990. In October 2019, the 
European Union, Iceland and Norway formally agreed to cooperate on reducing greenhouse 
gas emissions by at least 40 % by 2030. 
 
Norway is also seeking to fulfil its enhanced ambition through its cooperation on climate 
action with the EU. In the event that Norway's enhanced nationally determined contribution 
goes beyond the target set in the EU’s next NDC, Norway intends to use voluntary 
cooperation under Article 6 of the Paris Agreement to fulfil the part that goes beyond what is 
fulfilled through the climate cooperation with the European Union. 
 
The policy Norway pursues and the choices it makes in the period up to 2030 will be of 
crucial importance in laying the basis for the transition to a low-emission society by 2050. 
Through the climate cooperation with the EU and Iceland, Norway will also take part in EU 
climate legislation in the period 2021–2030. The EU’s climate policy is based on three pieces 
of legislation: the Emissions Trading System (EU ETS), the Effort Sharing Regulation for 
emissions that fall outside the EU ETS, and the Land Use, Land-Use Change and Forestry 
(LULUCF) Regulation.  
 
The EU ETS applies to emissions from installations in industry and the energy supply sector, 
and to aviation within the European Economic Area (EEA). About half of Norway’s total 
emissions are covered by the system. The ETS sets a joint European cap on emissions, which 
must not exceed the total number of allowances available. A key mechanism of the ETS is the 
25 
 annual tightening of the cap. As a result of this annual reduction in the number of emission 
allowances, the allowances issued in 2030 will correspond to a cut of 43 % in emissions from 
all the installations included in the system from 2005. If the linear reduction rate for 
allowances is maintained unchanged after 2030, the number of allowances available for the 
installations in the system will be reduced to 365 million by 2050. This is about 84 % lower 
than the volume of emissions in 2005.  
 
The Effort Sharing Regulation applies mainly to emissions from transport, agriculture, buildings 
and waste, but also to emissions from the oil and gas industry and manufacturing that fall 
outside the EU ETS. The Regulation is designed to ensure that the non-ETS emissions in the 
EU as a whole are reduced by 30 % from 2005 to 2030. Each country is assigned a binding 
national target to reduce its emissions by between 0 and 40 % between 2005 and 2030, 
depending on its GDP and taking cost effectiveness into account. The Regulation translates 
this commitment into binding annual greenhouse gas emission targets for each country for 
each year in the period 2021–2030. Countries may choose to achieve their targets by reducing 
their own emissions or through cooperation with other European countries.  
 
The LULUCF) Regulation applies to the following land accounting categories: managed forest 
land, afforested land, deforested land, managed grassland, managed cropland and managed 
wetland. If emissions are higher than removals nationally, the accounted net emissions must 
be offset in one of three ways (the ‘no-debit’ rule): 1) by purchasing LULUCF credits from 
other EU/EEA countries; 2) by a corresponding extra reduction in emissions under the Effort 
Sharing Regulations, either nationally or 3) by purchasing emission allowances from another 
country’s annual emission allocation under the Effort Sharing Regulation. If removals exceed 
emissions in a country, a small share of the net removals can be used to meet the country’s 
commitment under the Effort Sharing Regulation. Each country must also calculate a 
reference level for managed forest, in practice the level of harvesting in the period 2021–
2030. If the actual quantity harvested is higher than the reference level, this is accounted for 
as emissions. A lower level of harvesting is accounted for as removals. A compensation 
mechanism that can be used under certain conditions has been established for countries where 
emissions from managed forest land exceed removals. This allows countries to increase the 
level of harvesting above the reference level having to account for the difference as emissions. 
 
Norwegian participation in the EU ETS has been part of the EEA Agreement since 2008. 
Once an agreement on joint fulfilment is concluded with the EU, Norway will also take part in 
efforts to reduce emissions under the two regulations on non-ETS emissions. This means that 
Norway will participate in EU efforts to cut emissions on the same lines as the EU member 
states. Under the Effort Sharing Regulation, Norway will be allocated a target of reducing 
non-ETS emissions by 40 %. Like the EU member states, Norway will have an obligation to 
comply with the no-debit rule for the LULUCF sector. This agreement will be included in 
26 
 Protocol 31 of the EEA Agreement, and Norway will only be bound by the two regulations 
for the period 2012–2030.  
 
The agreement with the EU sets out the scope of Norway’s 2030 target of reducing emissions 
by 40 % compared to 1990 levels, but it is up to the Storting and Government to determine 
how they are to be achieved. The agreement does not preclude emission cuts exceeding those 
Norway undertakes through its participation in the EU climate legislation. For example, the 
Government’s political platform sets out the ambition of reducing Norway’s non-ETS 
emissions by 45 % by 2030 relative to 2005. The Government intends to achieve this through 
domestic emission reductions, and it is making plans to this end. If strictly necessary, Norway 
can make use of the EU flexibility mechanisms. This ambition will entail voluntary 
strengthening of Norway’s commitments for non-ETS emission reductions beyond those in 
the agreement with the EU on joint fulfilment. will draw up a plan for achieving Norway’s 
climate commitments once an agreement with the EU on joint fulfilment is in place In this 
connection, the Government has commissioned a review by several government agencies of 
mitigation measures that can bring about reductions of at least 50 % in non-ETS emissions by 
2030. 
 
3.2  A climate policy that results in a low level of emissions in all 
sectors  
3.2.1  It must pay off to cut greenhouse gas emissions  
Putting a price on emissions is consistent with the polluter-pays-principle. This approach 
encourages a shift to more climate-friendly production and consumption. The main 
instruments of Norwegian climate policy are therefore taxes and emissions trading, which are 
cross-sectoral economic instruments. More than 80 % of Norwegian greenhouse gas 
emissions are currently subject to the CO  tax, included in the EU ETS, or both. Cross-
2
sectoral economic instruments affect all stakeholders, and give incentives to develop and 
deploy new technologies. Both current and anticipated prices of emissions will influence how 
individuals and companies adapt and the decisions they make. 
 
Policy instruments used in addition to taxation and emissions trading are direct regulation, 
standards, agreements and grants for emission reduction measures. These instruments also 
provide incentives for research and development of low-emission technology. Direct support 
for technology development is also provided.  
 
Putting a price on emissions – the Emissions Trading System  
The manufacturing and petroleum sectors in Norway will continue to develop within the 
framework of the EU Emissions Trading System (EU ETS). Norway has been part of the EU 
27 
 ETS through the EEA Agreement since 2008, and this is crucially important for achieving the 
country’s climate targets. According to the Climate Change Act, the effect of Norway's 
participation in the EU ETS is to be taken into account in assessing progress towards its 2050 
target. This means that the contribution made by Norwegian companies to emission 
reductions in Europe through their participation in the EU ETS will be included in 
assessments of progress towards the target. 
 
Through the annual reductions in the number of allowances issued, the EU ETS will ensure 
substantial cuts in emissions. After 2020, the annual reduction in the number of allowances 
will correspond to almost 50 million tonnes CO -eq. If the linear reduction rate is maintained 
2
after 2030, the number of allowances available will drop from 2 billion in 2013 to 365 million 
in 2050. This is a reduction of about 86 % from 1990. The steady reduction in the number of 
allowances available will drive emission reductions in sectors covered by the EU ETS, both in 
the EU and in Norway.  
 
The dwindling number of allowances available will mean that installations in the ETS sector 
have to make deep cuts in their emissions by 2050. Even if the European power supply system 
is entirely decarbonised, other ETS sectors will also have to reduce their emissions. If the EU 
ETS continues after 2050 with the same linear reduction rate for the cap, the number of 
emission allowances issued for manufacturing, the petroleum sector and electricity production 
will be reduced to zero soon after 2050.  
 
Figur 3.1 Emissions and emissions cap in the EU ETS  
Greenhouse gas emissions and cap in the EU emission trading 
scheme (EU ETS)
 2 500
 2 000
s
t
n
e
la  1 500
v
iu
q
e
-
2
O  1 000
C
 s
n
o
t
 n
o  500
illiM
 -
2005 2010 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 2055
Greenhouse gas emission from installations under the EU ETS Emission cap
 -500
 
28 
 The figure shows actual greenhouse gas emissions from installations in the EU ETS from 2005 to 
2018 (bars). The green line shows the number of emission allowances available from 2005 onwards 
(the cap), assuming that the linear reduction rate remains unchanged after 2030.  
Source: Ministry of Climate and Environment  
 
Putting a price on emissions – taxation  
Norway introduced a CO  tax in 1991, and was one of the first countries in the world to do so. 
2
Since then, taxation of greenhouse gas emissions has been one of the main instruments of 
Norwegian climate policy. About 66 % of Norway’s total greenhouse gas emissions and 67 % 
of its non-ETS emissions are now taxed. The tax applies to almost all use of fossil fuels that is 
not covered by the EU ETS.  
 
If the tax is set to give the same carbon price for all emissions, the incentive to reduce 
emissions is the same across the board. This makes it easier to achieve specific targets at the 
lowest possible cost to society. In some cases, Norway has applied reduced tax rates and 
exemptions from the carbon tax. However, n the last few years, a number of the reduced tax 
rates and exemptions have been removed. The standard carbon tax rate has been raised 
gradually, and was NOK 508 per tonne CO -eq in 2019.  
2
 
Raising taxes gradually over time provides a stable and predictable economic framework, and 
promotes the development of markets for new low- and zero-emission technologies. The 
design of instruments for pricing emissions will be developed further over time.  
 
Regulatory measures 
A number of general and sector-specific acts, which vary in purpose, are used to regulate 
greenhouse gas emissions in Norway today. The most important of them are the Pollution 
Control Act and the Planning and Building Act.  
 
Regulation can ease the transition to a low-emission society  provided that regulatory 
measures are designed to avoid unsound investments and lock-in of solutions that result in 
high emissions.. Examples of direct regulation include technical requirements for buildings, 
biofuel quota obligations for road traffic, regulation of methane emissions from waste 
treatment and the prohibition of new cultivation in peatland areas.  
 
Direct regulatory measures for greenhouse gas emissions are often used in combination with 
and to supplement other instruments. A recent example is a prohibition on using mineral oil to 
heat buildings from 2020, which is being supplemented with grants for the switch to 
renewable forms of heating and the removal of oil tanks.  
 
29 
 Application of the Pollution Control Act can be adapted to different industries, and in 
combination with funding instruments for the research and innovation sector and any other 
general policy instruments, this can encourage technology development and cuts in emissions. 
For example, emissions of nitrous oxide from fertiliser production and diffuse emissions from 
the petroleum industry have been regulated under the Pollution Control Act. The Act 
supplements the general economic instruments such as emissions trading and taxes. 
3.2.2  A low-emission development pathway must be just and equitable  
Most people’s lives will improve in a low-emission society. However, this does not mean that 
the transition will be without consequences. Through the Paris Agreement, Norway has 
recognised the importance of ensuring that climate policy supports a low-emission 
development pathway that is just and equitable for all. Norway has also endorsed the 
Guidelines for a Just Transition adopted by the International Labour Organization (ILO).19  
These guidelines outline key elements of a just transition, including:  
•  Social protection for people who are adversely affected by the green 
transition and support for a green transition in the business sector. 
•  Skills development for everyone.  
•  A green transition based on social dialogue.  
 
A major part of the labour force in Norway is employed in public or private entities that will 
only to a limited extent be directly affected by the transition to a low-emission society. The 
qualifications they need may change, but people who are employed for example in the health 
and care sector will mainly be affected by other processes of change in the years up to 2050. 
However, some sectors will be more directly affected by a low-emission pathway and will 
face a higher transition risk. Restructuring will be more challenging for these sectors.  
 
Norway has a number of mechanisms that provide good support for restructuring of the labour 
market. The tripartite cooperation between employers, trade unions and government is of 
fundamental importance for dealing with various types of challenges. An important element 
of this cooperation is to ensure that employees in sectors that are going through restructuring 
have a safety net and that people have opportunities to develop new skills and acquire new 
qualifications. It is also important that the education system and continuing training 
programmes put people in a position where they can find jobs in the labour market in a future 
low-emission society. In its policy platform, the Government stated that it will pursue a skills 
policy that helps people to develop the knowledge and skills they need to stay in work as new 
restructuring needs arise and to obtain new jobs in a changing labour market. This will also 
provide a good basis for a just and equitable transition to a low-emission society.  
 
19
International Labour Organization (2015): Guidelines for a just transition towards environmentally sustainable economies 
and societies for all  
30 
  
Knowledge is the key to continuing the development of new, green, competitive jobs and a 
better, more effective public sector. Research and higher education is therefore a crucial area 
in the development of a sustainable society. The Government presented its long-term plan for 
research and higher education for the period 2019–2028 in a white paper in October 2018 
(Meld. St. 4 (2018–2019)). This constitutes part of the Government’s efforts to facilitate 
growth in overall value creation, create new profitable jobs, restructure the Norwegian 
economy and implement the transition towards a greener society. The long-term plan includes 
expansion of targeted research and education initiatives and greater research efforts for the 
transition to a low-emission society. As part of this process, the Government will give priority 
to developing technology and solutions for the transition to a greener society, strengthen 
research and higher education that can increase understanding of climate change and lay a 
foundation for successful climate change adaptation, and strengthen research and higher 
education to further develop an integrated, knowledge-based public administration that 
safeguards considerations relating to climate and the environment.  
 
A just and equitable transition to a low-emission society is an inclusive process involving all 
parts of society. Everyone must be included, from individuals to civil society organisations. 
One of Norway’s overall political goals is to increase participation in civil society 
organisations and voluntary work. Because of its importance in Norwegian society, the 
Government will encourage even more involvement in climate and environmental issues 
across all types of voluntary organisations and societies.  
 
Today’s children and adolescents will be adults in the low-emission society of 2050. Their 
mobilisation across the country in the spring of 2019 demonstrated a strong engagement and 
sense of responsibility for their own future. Children’s and young people’s organisations are 
already included in public consultations so that their views can be reflected in policy 
development. The Norwegian Children and Youth Council has been represented in the 
Norwegian delegation to the international climate negotiations under the Climate Change 
Convention for several years already. It will be important to maintain this practice as the Paris 
Agreement is implemented, since the climate negotiations will be the most important arena 
for ensuring that countries are delivering the contributions they have submitted.  
 
Access to information is an essential basis for participation in decision making. Norway’s 
website miljøstatus.no provides quality-assured information on the state of the environment 
and environmental trends in Norway, and includes information on climate change for 
individuals, schools and other groups (some of the information is available in English, see 
environment.no). A number of government agencies cooperate in providing the information: 
the Norwegian Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority, the Directorate of Fisheries, the 
Institute of Marine Research, the Norwegian Coastal Administration, the Norwegian Food 
Safety Authority, the Norwegian Polar Institute and the Directorate for Cultural Heritage. The 
31 
 municipalities also have an important role to play in ensuring that people have access to local 
information on climate change and the low-emission transition.  
 
3.2.3  Enhancing the knowledge base for Norway’s long-term climate policy  
Climate policy must be based on the best available science. A sound knowledge base is 
important not only as a basis for implementing policy as effectively as possible, but also 
because it helps to reduce uncertainty and puts people in a better position to deal with climate 
risk. The Climate Risk Commission also highlighted this in its report to the Government.20   
 
Climate policy instruments must be developed on the basis of up-to-date knowledge on what 
is needed to achieve agreed targets. What appears to be a sensible and effective policy in the 
short term is not always the option that will result in a low-emission development pathway in 
the long term. Moreover, decisions made now may lock in persistently high emissions and 
thus prevent Norway from achieving its 2050 target. Analyses of how policy, instruments and 
measures should be designed to promote a low-emission pathway up to 2050 are therefore 
extremely important.  
 
One of the next steps will therefore be to initiate a 2050 assessment  that analyses measures 
and instruments for achieving Norway’s climate target for 2050. The main purpose will be to 
develop a sound scientific basis for a framework for a long-term low-emission development 
pathway in relevant sectors in Norway, in line with its 2050 target.  
 
The analysis will outline pathways towards a low-emission society and choices that can be 
made to promote a low-emission pathway up to 2050. It is important to develop a sound 
scientific basis that evaluates restructuring needs and possible solutions, and assesses barriers 
and costs. Climate risk will be considered where relevant. The Government is promoting the 
development of zero- and low-emission technology. Some of this work will take place outside 
Norway. The availability of zero- and low-emission technologies and the costs of their 
deployment will be important considerations. The analysis will therefore include an overview 
of technology trends, costs and opportunities internationally. 
 
The analysis must also identify cross-sectoral issues. This applies particularly in areas such as 
sustainable, integrated land-use management, energy, and a just and equitable transition 
involving various sectors. It will also be crucially important to analyse the roles of different 
stakeholders in the transition to a low-emission society. These include central government, 
counties and municipalities, the business sector including the financial industry, and civil 
 
20 NOU 2018: 17 Summary Climate risk and the Norwegian economy 
32 
 society. The importance of Norway’s relationship with the EU in the period up to 2030 must 
also be considered. 
 
The transition to a low-emission society in 2050 will affect every part of society. The 
preparation of the analysis will be an inclusive process, and broad-based public debate will be 
encouraged. Business and industry will be involved in various ways, including follow-up of 
the roadmaps various sectors have drawn up for a low-emission transition. These roadmaps 
describe how different industries can achieve zero emissions by 2050 while at the same time 
maintaining growth and jobs in Norway.  
 
3.3  Climate-smart towns and communities, and spatial 
management in line with a low-emission development 
pathway  
Sound social planning and spatial management is important for social development generally 
and for the development of a low-emission society in particular. Decisions about siting, 
construction methods and design for buildings, infrastructure and services can influence 
emissions and energy use for many years into the future. It is therefore vital to start taking the 
target of transforming Norway into a low-emission society by 2050 into account from now 
onwards. This will be relevant when making decisions that directly affect land use, such as the 
construction of roads and cabins, urban development, and the conversion of agricultural land 
for other purposes. However, it is important to remember that many different interests must be 
taken into account in spatial planning, including the development of urban areas.  
 
The Planning and Building Act is intended to promote sustainable development in the best 
interests of individuals, society as a whole and future generations. Within this framework, it 
allows for climate change to be taken into account in planning a transition to a low-emission 
society. The Act allows for high priority to be given to local solutions in planning processes. 
Planning under the Act requires a balance to be found between a number of different, 
important interests. One factor that will determine how strongly planning processes promote 
the transition to a low-emission society will be the weight given to considerations of climate 
change. If plans under the Act are in conflict with national or significant regional interests, the 
relevant authorities may raise objections to them. This system is designed to ensure that 
national and significant regional interests are taken into account in local planning. Sound, 
clear guidance is vital to ensure that municipalities integrate climate considerations into their 
planning. The Government has therefore adopted central government planning guidelines for 
municipalities and counties. Two of these documents are particularly important for 
sustainable land use and climate-smart towns and communities: 
•  Central Government Planning Guidelines for coordinated housing, land-use and 
transport planning, which highlight the importance of coordinating development 
33 
 patterns and transport systems. They encourage the development of compact towns 
and urban areas and steps to promote green forms of transport. They also include 
guidance for finding a balance between different interests when designing towns and 
urban communities. In addition, they are intended to play a part in reducing transport 
needs and the conversion of cultivated and environmentally valuable areas for other 
purposes. 
•  Central Government Planning Guidelines on climate and energy planning and climate 
change adaptation, which are intended to facilitate action by municipalities, counties 
and central government agencies to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and promote a 
green energy transition through planning processes and otherwise when exercising 
authority. The guidelines also set out requirements for active climate and energy 
planning at local level that promotes and plays a part in reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions and in the green energy transition. 
 
Climate and energy planning is now part of planning processes in the vast majority of 
municipalities, but there are wide variations in how it is organised and how actively the 
municipalities use their plans. Some municipalities have a separate climate and energy plan, 
while others have chosen to integrate climate and energy planning into overall planning 
processes. A few municipalities, including Hamar and the cities of Bergen and Oslo, have in 
addition established local carbon budgets, and municipal bodies report on progress towards 
targets. The Norwegian Environment Agency provides guidance, draws up greenhouse gas 
emission statistics for municipalities and counties, and has developed a tool for calculating the 
effects of different mitigation measures on emissions.  
 
The transport sector will be important in Norway’s transformation to a low-emission society. 
The white paper Norwegian National Transport Plan 2018–2029 (Meld. St. 33 (2016–2017)) 
sets out the financial framework for central government investments in the transport sector. It 
is intended to bring about reductions in greenhouse gas emissions from the transport sector 
that are consistent with Norway’s transformation to a low-emission society, and to reduce 
other adverse environmental impacts. Other important elements of the plan include phasing in 
new technology, the development of infrastructure for zero-emission vehicles, and tax policy. 
The Government’s initiatives for freight transport; for public transport, walking and cycling; 
and for green shipping should also reduce emissions from the sector. Norway’s electric 
vehicle policy has already reduced average greenhouse gas emissions from passenger cars. 
About 8 % of passenger cars in Norway were electric by the first quarter of 2019. The 
Ministry of Climate and Environment tasked Enova with establishing a zero-emission fund, 
which was launched in summer 2019. This is a funding instrument including several types of 
grants to reduce emissions from commercial transport through effective deployment of zero-
emission solutions. 
 
34 
 Integrated urban land-use and transport agreements involving central government, county and 
municipal bodies are being negotiated for Norway’s largest urban areas. So far, only the 
agreement for Trondheim and its surroundings has been concluded. These agreements are 
intended to play a part in achieving the target of zero growth in passenger car traffic for the 
largest urban areas, and to ensure coordination of land-use planning and the development of 
public transport and pedestrian and cycle paths. 
Box 3.2 The ‘Klimasats’ grant scheme 
The Klimasats grant scheme was established in 2016 and provides support for municipal and 
county projects. Funding is used to bring about cuts in emissions, increase awareness of 
possible mitigation measures and increase demand for climate-friendly goods and services. 
Grants are available in the following five areas under the Klimasats scheme:  
•  climate-friendly land-use and transport planning; 
•  investments in climate-friendly transport measurers; 
•  mitigation measures in other sectors; 
•  conceptual studies of mitigation measures – help to move from words to action; 
•  networking to build expertise and share experiences.  
Source: Norwegian Environment Agency  
1.1.1  Sustainable, integrated spatial management in line with a low-emission 
development pathway  
Patterns of land use develop largely as a result of small-scale decisions, each of which on its 
own would not have major consequences, but that in combination may result in negative 
impacts on climate and environment. In making decisions on land use, it is necessary to find a 
balance between different interests such as food production, infrastructure, climate change, 
biodiversity and ecosystem services. It is important to avoid decisions that will shift problems 
elsewhere; for example, measures to reduce deforestation in one area should not result in the 
development of other carbon-rich areas or areas that are valuable for food production or 
biodiversity.  
Box 3.3 Government expectations for regional and municipal planning 2019–
2023 
Every four years, the Government publishes its expectations for regional and municipal 
planning as a means of promoting sustainable development throughout the country. The 
counties and municipalities must use them as a basis for work on regional and municipal 
planning strategies and plans, and they also apply to central government participation in these 
planning processes.  
In the latest document, the Government has chosen to focus on four major challenges:  
•  creating a sustainable welfare society;  
35 
 •  creating an ecologically sustainable society through an active climate policy and 
responsible resource management;  
•  creating a socially sustainable society;  
•  creating a safe society for everyone.  
Regional and local authorities have key responsibilities in addressing these challenges. This 
applies to all counties and municipalities, regardless of their size and expertise. Planning is 
one of their most important tools in this work.  
Source: National expectations regarding regional and municipal planning 2019–2023  
In order to reduce development of new areas and land conversion, it should be a priority to 
use areas that have already been developed efficiently and sustainably. It is therefore 
important to ensure that different land categories are kept in good condition so that their value 
is maintained or enhanced and they are of benefit to society.  
 
A clearer national approach to land use policy will make it easier to develop an integrated, 
effective policy based on coordinated evaluation of all land use and to find a balance between 
different interests and factors that local decision-makers have to take into account. It is 
important to make an assessment of how a sustainable, integrated spatial management policy 
can be designed to promote a low-emission development pathway in line with the Paris 
Agreement and Norway’s climate target for 2050.  
 
The agreement between Norway, Iceland and the EU to cooperate on fulfilment of the 2030 
climate targets entails an obligation for Norway to ensure that emissions from the LULUCF 
sector do not exceed removals in 2030. The assessment of land use policy mentioned above 
could therefore include consideration of how a climate and land use target for 2050 can 
support a sustainiable and holistic land use management.   
 
3.4  A diversified economy and green competitiveness  
3.4.1  Innovation and technology development to find low-emission solutions  
Developing a green, competitive low-emission society that creates value and provides 
workplaces in Norway will require business and industry to focus on low-emission solutions 
and a robust research and innovation system that can support initiatives all the way from basic 
research to the market. Knowledge, skills, research and innovation are an essential basis for 
maintaining an innovative, competitive business sector in Norway. Research and technology 
development to promote the shift to a greener society is a very high priority and an important 
element of the Government’s long-term plan for research and higher education 2015–2024 
(Meld. St. 4 (2018–2019)).  
36 
 Box 3.4 The Government’s action plan for green shipping  
Norway is a world leader in the green transition for all shipping segments, but the pace of 
change must be increased substantially to achieve its ambitions. Norway is already in a 
leading position globally as regards the deployment of zero- and low-emission technology in 
the maritime sector. By 2022, more than one third of the country’s car ferries will use electric 
propulsion systems. The Yara Birkeland is due to be launched in 2020, and will be the 
world’s first autonomous fully electric container vessel. The grocery wholesaler ASKO is 
planning to use autonomous vessels for emission-free transport of goods across the Oslofjord. 
The first hydrogen-powered car ferry will be put into operation in Norway in 2021, and this 
may prepare the way for longer range emission-free shipping.  
•  The Government’s ambitions are to reduce emissions from domestic shipping and 
fishing vessels by half by 2030 and to promote the development of zero- and low-
emission solutions for all vessel categories. 
•  The Government will take steps to encourage the emergence of Norwegian winners 
during the green transition in the shipping sector, and will play a part in developing a 
sustainable shipping sector for the 21st century. 
•  The Government will provide a framework that enables the Norwegian maritime 
industry to acquire experience and expertise that will put it in a good position to be an 
important supplier for the forthcoming restructuring of the domestic and global 
shipping sector. 
Source: The Government’s action plan for green shipping, 2019  
 
One of the world's most promising technology markets at present comprises climate, 
environment and energy technologies. Norway is in a good position to succeed in several 
areas of these markets. Norway has a well-developed business sector, strong knowledge 
clusters and good educational and training opportunities in areas such as energy and materials 
technology, carbon capture and storage (CCS), forestry and agriculture, green shipping 
technology, waste management and recyling, environmental monitoring and green buildings. 
In addition, Norway has for many years had strict environmental legislation and has applied 
effective policy instruments to control greenhouse gas emissions. This situation promotes 
improvement, development and a restructuring.  
 
In many areas, low-emission solutions are gaining market shares and resulting in wealth 
creation and jobs. Global climate policy is expected to be made steadily stricter, and this is 
having a positive effect on willingness to invest in low-emission solutions in various business 
sectors. Investment in research, development and commercialisation of low-emission 
solutions is vital, and needs the support of society as a whole. Over time, the Government has 
scaled up and enhanced research efforts for Norway’s transformation to a low-emission 
society, and it will give priority to technology and solutions for the shift to a greener 
economy. However, Norway on its own will not be able to develop all the low-emission 
37 
 solutions that it needs. A small country like Norway also needs to make use of and adapt to 
technological developments that are taking place internationally.  
 
The Government presented its strategy for green competitiveness in 2017. Its aim is to support 
a green transition that increases value creation in Norway. One of the main priorities in efforts 
to strengthen Norway’s green competitiveness is to develop targeted initiatives for and focus 
special attention on climate and environment in publicly-funded research, innovation and 
technology development, wherever relevant.  
Box 3.5 Principles of green competitiveness  
The Government set out certain principles of green competitiveness in its strategy:  
•  the authorities must provide a predictable framework and act as a driving force in 
Norway’s transition to a low-emission society;  
•  the polluter must pay as part of an integrated policy to promote green competitiveness;  
•  Norway’s target of being a low-emission society by 2050 must be taken into account 
in planning and investment processes;  
•  there must be targeted initiatives for and a special focus on climate and environment in 
publicly-funded research, innovation and technology development wherever relevant;  
•  the public sector as a customer must support the adoption and development of new 
environmentally friendly technologies, products and solutions;  
•  the necessary information must be available to enable consumers, the business sector 
and investors to choose green solutions and products;  
•  green competitiveness must be based on well-functioning markets.  
Source: Better growth, lower emissions – the Norwegian Government’s strategy for green competitiveness, 
2017 
 
Norway has a broad set funding agencies that promote the development of climate and 
environmental technology and green competitiveness. The most important of these are Enova, 
Innovation Norway, the Research Council of Norway and the SkatteFUNN tax incentive 
scheme.  
 
Enova supports technology and market development that can play a part in the transition to a 
low-emission society. It runs various programmes that provide investment support and risk 
reduction for businesses that are developing and testing new solutions or that wish to make 
use of new technology. The aim is to promote permanent change in the market for new 
energy-efficient and climate-friendly solutions that will have a place in a low-emission 
society. Enova’s goals are to promote: 
38 
 •  reductions in greenhouse gas emissions that will contribute towards Norway’s 
emission reduction commitment for 2030;  
•  greater innovation in energy and climate technology that is adapted to the transition to 
a low-emission society; 
•  improved security of supply through flexible and efficient use of energy and peak load 
capacity. 
 
Some of the changes that will be needed depend on technology and solutions that may take 
years to develop. Companies therefore need considerable willingness to invest and take risks. 
Funding from Enova reduces the risk for businesses and makes it more likely that new 
solutions will be developed and deployed. Enova provides support both to help technology 
initiatives to make the transition from the pilot phase to market introduction, and to promote 
permanent market change.  
 
Box 3.6 Gassnova 
Gassnova is a state-owned enterprise working in the field of carbon capture and storage. Its 
main task is to promote the development of technology and expertise for cost-effective, 
innovative CCS solutions. Gassnova is playing a key role in maturing the full-scale CCS 
project in Norway. 
 
Innovation Norway’s main task is to promote business development that is profitable in both 
business and socio-economic terms, and to unlock the potential for business development in 
different regions of the country. Innovation Norway administers the environmental 
technology scheme, which promotes the development of green solutions. The scheme 
encourages sustainable business and industry in Norway by providing grants for pilot and 
demonstration projects based on environmental technology.  
 
The Research Council of Norway is charged with generating value added in the research 
system through the achievement of research that could not otherwise be realised by the 
various stakeholders on their own. Its mission is to promote an integrated research and 
development system that supplies high-quality research, develops knowledge that can be used 
to address major social and industrial challenges, encourages dynamic national and 
international collaboration, and creates a framework for learning, application and innovation. 
 
The Resarch Council channels funding through research programmes, which issue calls for 
proposals at regular intervals. Most of its current research activity related to low-emission 
technologies is in the energy field, primarily renewable energy, energy efficiency and CCS. 
39 
 The Research Council also administers the SKATTEfunn tax incentive scheme, a rights-based 
scheme that provides tax deductions for all businesses engaged in R&D.  
 
To promote green competitiveness through research, innovation and technology development, 
it is important to ensure good coordination between public agencies in the research and 
innovation system. A good example of this is the PILOT-E scheme, which involves 
collaboration between Innovation Norway, the Research Council and Enova. The objective of 
the scheme is to speed up the development and deployment of novel products and services in 
the field of environment-friendly energy technology as a way of promoting the low-emission 
transition both in Norway and internationally. 
Box 3.7 "Nysnø" Climate Investments  
Nysnø was established in December 2017 and began operating in autumn 2018. Its purpose is 
to make profitable investments in new, climate-friendly technology that directly or indirectly 
helps to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Its investments largely target new technology at the 
transition stage from development to commercialisation. It focuses mainly on companies in 
early phases of development, but can also make follow-up investments in later phases. Nysnø 
invests in companies that are not listed on the stock market and/or funds that target such 
companies, and that operate in or from Norway.  
 
3.4.2  Investment for a low-emission development pathway and assessment of 
climate risk  
To achieve the world’s climate targets, it will be necessary to make both public and private 
investments more sustainable, especially investments in infrastructure and other long-term 
investments. This is recognised in the Paris Agreement, where one of the aims is to make 
finance flows consistent with a pathway towards low greenhouse gas emissions and climate-
resilient development. In its 2017 report Investing in Climate, Investing in Growth, the OECD 
pointed out that investments in emission-intensive solutions today can make the transition to a 
low-emission future both costlier and more difficult. The world cannot rely on finding new 
finance flows to fund a low-emission future. Already existing finance flows must therefore be 
used for investments that will promote a low-emission pathway, not prevent it.  
Box 3.8 Roadmap for the financial sector  
In June 2018, Finance Norway published its Roadmap for Green Competitiveness in the 
Financial Sector. This is intended to point the way towards a profitable and sustainable 
financial sector in 2030. It includes a number of general and industry-specific 
recommendations for the financial industry and for the authorities. The roadmap demonstrates 
that the industry is aware of its role in the transition to a low-emission economy. One of its 
key recommendations is that the financial industry should contribute to innovation and change 
in other sectors. Finance Norway points out that as a lender, insurer and investor, the financial 
40 
 sector can be a good partner and driver of change in other industries, through both pricing and 
cooperation. The roadmap therefore recommends that the financial sector should work more 
closely with other industries such as construction, the process industries and the oil and gas 
industry to identify potential improvements and financing needs. It also recommends 
intensifying work on active ownership, both individually and collectively, for example 
through dialogue with companies’ boards and management, voting at general meetings, and 
cooperating with asset managers. Finance Norway points to the need to increase expertise and 
understanding of climate risk in the industry, and states that this change can be made more 
quickly and effectively if directors and management have the necessary knowledge. In a 
survey of Norway’s major financial institutions, the Norwegian Climate Foundation found 
that climate risk is on the agenda of the management and board of most institutions, and that 
most of them are taking steps to build up their employees’ expertise in this field. 
Source: Finance Norway, 2018. Roadmap  for Green Competitiveness in the Financial Sector  
 
The global perspective of the report is also relevant to Norway, both for private and public 
investments within the country and for private investments outside Norway. Hydropower and 
water supply infrastructure, roads and buildings are infrastructure types that have a long 
lifetime in Norway. Decisions on these kinds of investments are made every day at various 
levels and by a variety of stakeholders. It is therefore vital to ensure proper assessment of how 
a low-emission development pathway will affect the viability of and risks associated with 
long-term investments in both the private and the public sector, and to find suitable responses. 
Assessments of this kind reduce the risk of making unsound investments.  
 
In its 2018 report21, the Climate Risk Commission identified some general principles that can 
improve the way society manages climate risk. They include ensuring that there is a sound 
framework for assessments and decisions and that analytical processes are broad-based and 
integrated. On the basis of these principles, the Commission drew up recommendations for 
both the private and the public sector.   
 
The Norwegian Government considers sound information and analyses, good decision-
making processes and the right incentives as an important basis for sound management of 
climate risk in both the private and the public sector. Obtaining more information and 
knowlege on climate risk can be useful for both sectors.  
 
The Government plans to provide an overview of efforts to identify and reduce climate-
related risks in the next white paper on long-term perspectives on the Norwegian economy. 
The annual budget documents will include an update on the status of this work. The 
 
21NOU 2018: 17 Summary Climate risk and the Norwegian economy  
41 
 Government intends to follow up the recommendation by the Climate Risk Commission to 
stress test Norway’s public finances and national wealth. In this connection, scenarios for oil, 
gas and carbon prices will be established, including a scenario reflecting the objectives of the 
Paris Agreement. 
 
The Climate Risk Commission recommended the preparation of central government 
guidelines on climate risk to improve the decision-making system for the public sector. The 
Government agrees that as climate-related risks become apparent, they must be taken into 
account in assessments of public policies and measures and must be considered in 
conjuunction with other forms of risk and the framework used for risk management generally. 
The Government will review existing guidance on economic analysis for the most relevant 
sectors and consider whether climate risk is adequately taken into account, given the 
Commission’s recommendation. 
 
One important recommendation by the Commission is that Norwegian companies should use 
the TCFD framework for climate-related financial disclosures. The Government agrees with 
the Commision that the TCFD’s recommendations provide a useful framework for reporting 
on climate-related risk. Large Norwegian companies should report in line with the TCFD 
framework. The Government will consider the Commission’s recommendation that a suitable 
framework should be established for disclosure of climate-related risks in the public sector 
and at national level. This could be a way of making assessments of climate risk as 
comparable as possible across sectors. At the same time, stricter requirements for reporting 
must be weighed up against the increase in costs this will involve. 
 
Many tools for assessing climate risk are available to the municipalities. The Government will 
evaluate whether the municipalities are take sufficient account of climate-related risks in their 
spatial planning processes.  
3.4.3  Public procurement  
The Norwegian public sector procures goods and services worth more than NOK 500 billion 
every year. This includes everything from major investments such as ferry services and 
buildings to purchases of office supplies. The organisation of public procurement is intended 
to ensure effective use of resources in the public sector. Public procurement is also a tool for 
achieving climate and environmental targets and has implications for the development of a 
low-emission society. The public sector can in some connections promote innovation and 
development in the supplier market by creating a demand for new solutions.  
New climate- and environment-friendly goods and services are being developed rapidly, and 
the Government wishes public procurement to be used as a driver of innovation and 
transformation in the Norwegian economy.  
 
42 
 National, county and municipal authorities and bodies governed by public law are required to 
organise their procurement activities in such a way that they reduce harmful environmental 
impacts and promote climate-friendly solutions where relevant. They can do this by including 
environmental criteria and conditions at various stages of a procurement process. If 
purchasers choose to include an environment-related award criterion, it should as a general 
rule be given a weighting of at least 30 %. This gives suppliers a clear signal that 
environmental considerations are an important element of the procurement process. 
 
Although there are legal requirements for public bodies to reduce the environmental impacts 
of their activities and promote climate-friendly procurement solutions, this is an area where 
the authorities themselves consider that they can do much more. Analyses by the Agency for 
Public Management and eGovernment indicate that there is a substantial potential for 
improvement as regards including environmental considerations in procurement processes, 
ensuring adequate levels of knowledge and expertise in organisations, and implementing 
procurement processes. To increase the proportion of green public procurement, it is 
important to build up expertise on how to include climate and environmental considerations in 
procurement processes, ensure that procurement strategies are a management responsibility, 
and make practical guidance easily available. It is also important that the environmental 
provisions of the procurement legislation are supplemented with a procurement policy that 
clarifies the areas where climate and environmental considerations have priority. Clear long-
term priorities make public procurement more effective and provide a more predictable 
business climate. The Government will prepare an action plan to put a green procurement 
policy into practice and thus increase the proportion of green public procurement and green 
innovation processes. 
Box 3.9 National Programme for Supplier Development  
The National Programme for Supplier Development was set up to promote innovation in 
public procurement. Innovative procurement involves making use of the opportunities offered 
by the procurement legislation and policy instruments to buy better products and services. The 
purpose is to make services better and more effective, create industrial growth and reduce 
emissions. The National Programme for Supplier Development is a driver of innovative 
procurement by contracting authorities at central and local government level. The 
Confederation of Norwegian Enterprise, the Norwegian Association of Local and Regional 
Authorities, the Agency for Public Management and eGovernment, Innovation Norway and 
the Research Council of Norway are responsible for the programme. The Confederation acts 
as project manager and provides a secretariat. Since it started in 2010, the programme has 
assisted local and central government bodies with more than 150 procurement processes and 
developed methodology for innovative public procurement. 
Source: innovativeanskaffelser.no  
 
43 
 The Government will consider whether key bodies responsible for climate and environmental 
work and public procurement, including the Agency for Public Management and 
eGovernment can develop tools to identify the effects and costs of including environmental 
requirements in public procurement processes. This could promote a general, coordinated 
build-up of expertise and help public bodies to carry out good, effective green procurement 
processes.  
3.5  Norway’s contribution to a low-emission development 
pathway in other countries  
Climate change is a global problem, and a global low-emission development pathway will 
only be possible if all countries do their part. It is clearly in Norway’s interests for other 
countries to work to achieve and strengthen their climate targets, and Norway’s policy is to 
promote positive drivers of a global low-emission development pathway. Norway will also 
work internationally to minimise negative drivers, such as fossil fuel subsidies. There are 
many available channels for strengthening international efforts. One of them is to play a 
leading role in the climate negotiations through development cooperation and regional and 
global cooperation.  
 
The UN Climate Change Convention and the international climate negotiations are the main forum for 
developing the legal basis for international climate cooperation. Norway is a driving force in 
these negotiations, and has for several years played a key role in developing rules under the 
Convention and the Paris Agreement. As the Katowice Rulebook adopted during the 2018 
climate summit is implemented and further developed, it will be important for Norway to seek 
to ensure that this process strengthens the Paris Agreement so that climate targets can be 
achieved.  
 
Regional cooperation is another important channel for Norway’s international climate efforts. 
Norway is making a substantial contribution to the transformation process in Europe, for 
example through the EEA and Norway Grants, where climate change and the environment are 
important priorities. Norway is also calling for an ambitious European climate policy, for 
example through its participation in the Green Growth Group, which brings together the EU 
countries that are advocating an ambitious EU climate policy.  
 
Cooperation and the development of climate technology are important elements of Norway’s 
contribution to global transformation. Technology development and cooperation on low-
emission solutions are essential. Norway is at the forefront in several areas, including green 
shipping and offshore wind power. CCS technology will play an important part in efforts to 
achieve the Paris target. Norwegian CCS activities span the entire development chain, and are 
making an important contribution to technology development in this field.  
 
44 
 The Government’s ambition is to achieve a cost-effective solution for full-scale CCS in 
Norway, provided that this also results in technology development internationally. The overall 
goal of the Government’s work in this field is to play a part in making CCS a cost-effective 
option to combating global climate change. Norway’s plan is to develop a CO  storage site 
2
with considerably more capacity than is needed for the Norwegian full-scale project. If the 
project is realised, this will make it possible for other industrial operators to store their 
captured CO  in the same facility rather than having to develop their own storage sites. 
2
 
People’s purchasing habits and their consumption in Norway also have effects globally. 
Goods and services purchased in Norway require both resources and energy to produce, and 
generate emissions beyond Norway’s borders. The public sector, individual people and 
companies are all consumers, and can play a part in the shift to a low-emission development 
pathway by demanding goods and services that result in low emissions both in the production 
phase and during use.  
 
Mitigation measures introduced in Norway can also have effects in other countries. For 
example, imported biofuels may have negative impacts in the countries where they are 
produced. The Government is pursuing an ambitious biofuel policy, but is at the same time 
seeking to avoid a situation where Norwegian demand increases deforestation. A requirement 
for fuel suppliers to include a certain proportion of advanced biofuels in the mix has therefore 
been introduced. In 2019, the Norwegian Environment Agency began to publish detailed 
information on biofuel sales by different companies, and the Agency for Public Management 
and eGovernment has published guidance on purchasing biofuels that are associated with a 
low risk of deforestation.  
 
Norway’s international climate work focuses on important sectors such as forests, energy and 
agriculture. Through the International Climate and Forest Initiative, Norway is seeing to 
reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. This is Norway’s largest 
contribution to international climate action. Through bilateral agreements, the Climate and 
Forest Initiative pays for reductions in emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in 
developing countries. In addition to reducing emissions, the initiative is having positive 
effects in other areas such as poverty, the rights of indigenous people and biodiversity. Steps 
to strengthen and further develop the initiative as a key part of the global climate solution will 
therefore continue to have very high priority.  
 
In the years ahead, it is developing countries that will account for the largest share of 
investments in infrastructure and energy systems. It is vital that these investments are based 
on renewable energy and other low-emission solutions. Climate finance, technology 
cooperation and capacity building will be vital tools for enabling developing countries to 
restructure their economies to combine economic growth with a low-emission development 
45 
 pathway. Norway will take a broad-based, integrated approach to the use of such tools to 
promote a long-term global low-emission pathway. Payment by results and cooperation on 
emission reductions involving emissions trading (market-based mechanisms) can help to 
boost the level of ambition and bring about the necessary transformation.  
 
Norway is also cooperating with developing countries such as China on emission reductions. 
China launched a national emissions trading system in 2017. The Norwegian Environment 
Agency is cooperating with Chinese authorities on preparations for its implementation. This is 
an important step towards pricing of emissions in China. Norway will continue to give 
priority to bilateral climate and environmental cooperation with important developing 
countries such as China, India and South Africa.  
 
Public funding is not sufficient in itself to bring about a global low-emission development 
pathway, but providing public funding can be an important way of mobilising private capital. 
Development aid can thus be used to mobilise other and larger capital flows. The energy 
sector is particularly important in the transition to a low-emission development pathway, since 
it is responsible for a large proportion of global emissions. It is therefore vital to promote 
renewable energy and energy efficiency in developing countries so that alternatives to coal are 
developed and deployed.  
 
Facilitating low emission development pathways may also have a range of economic and 
social benefits. In developing countries where the authorities’ capacity is limited, it is 
important to take a coordinated approach to development goals and work towards several 
goals at the same time. For example, air pollutants and greenhouse gas emissions often share 
the same sources. It can be sensible to coordinate action so that both types of emissions are 
reduced, thus maximising the climate and air quality benefits and improving public people’s 
health, reducing mortality and reducing emissions at the same time. Norway will therefore 
intensify its efforts to build up knowledge and capacity that will make it possible to 
coordinate work on climate change and air pollution.  
 
Norway’s bilateral climate efforts are largely related to its development cooperation, but the 
world is changing rapidly and new stakeholders are becoming involved, so that other 
constellations may become important for cooperation. In many countries, cooperation at state 
or regional level is important. For example, various states in the US have adopted ambitious 
emission reduction targets. California, which is effectively the world’s fifth largest economy, 
has set itself the target of becoming climate neutral by 2050. In 2017, Norway entered into 
cooperation with California on the exchange of experience and knowledge in several fields. 
46 
 1.1.2   
3.6  Behaviour patterns and sustainable lifestyles as part of a low-
emission development pathway  
Sustainable lifestyles will be an essential element of a low-emission development pathway in 
line with the long-term temperature target of the Paris Agreement. This means that the choices 
made by individual people are important. Access to knowledge and information and financial 
incentives help people to choose low-emission solutions in their everyday lives. The 
authorities have an important role to play in facilitating this, but suppliers of goods and 
services, including retailers, are also important because they can provide low-emission 
options for people to choose.  
 
In Norway, a range of incentives encourage behaviour patterns in line with a low-emission 
development pathway. Pricing of emissions is the most effective way of steering changes in 
behaviour patterns over time. Other types of incentives can be used to speed up the pace of 
change, for example incentives that encourage people to buy electric vehicles.  
 
Consumption in Norway is growing rapidly, and the environmental pressure caused by private 
consumption in Norway is high in global terms. Much of what we consume in Norway is 
produced in other countries, and domestic consumption thus plays a part in driving 
greenhouse gas emissions and environmental pressure outside Norway’s borders as well.  
The Government aims to promote more sustainable consumption patterns, and will therefore 
encourage cooperation and voluntary arrangements to this end. The Government’s efforts are 
intended to facilitate a shift to a more sustainble pathway by consumers, businesses and 
others. To make this possible, different stakeholders need relevant information and expertise. 
The Government therefore intends to take initiatives to boost knowledge in several areas. 
 
Access to information can make it easier to choose low-emission solutions. Information on 
products and services must be readily available, easy to understand, objective and quality 
assured. Official ecolabelling schemes such as the Nordic Swan and the EU Ecolabel are 
intended to make it easier for people to make environmentally sound choices.  
Box 3.10 The Nordic Swan Ecolabel and the EU Ecolabel  
The Nordic Swan Ecoloabel was established in 1989 by the Nordic Council of Ministers to 
provide consumers with quality assured environmental information. The ecolabel makes it 
easier to choose the environmentally best goods and services, and sets strict requirements for 
reducing climate impacts, more sustainable use of resources and a non-toxic environment.  
47 
 The EU Ecolabel is the EU’s official scheme, and is similar to the Nordic Swan. Producers must 
be able to document that their products meet a range of strict health and environmental 
criteria.  
Source: Stortingsmelding 25 (2018–2019) Framtidas forbrukar – grøn, smart og digital 
 
The Government will focus on increasing knowledge about sustainable consumption through 
information and teaching in schools and other educational institutions. These institutions are 
important arenas for raising awareness about ethical issues and environmental and resource 
problems, and for raising the level of  knowledge about consumption and sustainability.  
 
A number of businesses are already conscious of their role here, and are involved in efforts to 
develop a more sustainable society. However, there is no common meeting place for 
commercial stakeholders such as retailers who are in direct contact with consumers, experts 
(e.g. environmental researchers) and other interest groups and organisations (e.g. the 
Norwegian Consumer Council). The Government therefore announced in a recent white paper 
on consumer policy (Meld. St. 25 (2018–2019)) that it will establish a cooperation forum for 
sustainable development. The forum will be a meeting place where private- and public-sector 
stakeholders can exchange knowledge, ideas and experience that can be used in developing 
and identifying solutions for more sustainable consumption. Information-sharing will enable 
the forum to promote innovation and spin-off effects by making good ideas accessible to a 
wider public than its participants.  
Box 3.11 Revision of school curricula  
The Ministry of Education and Resarch is in the process of updating and revising curricula for 
all school subjects. Three interdisciplinary topics are to be introduced as part of the core 
curriculum:  
•  health and life skills;  
•  democracy and citizenship;  
•  sustainable development.  
These interdisciplinary topics will be included in the curricula for relevant subjects. The new 
curricula were adopted in autumn 2019 and will be in use from the school year 2020/2021. 
Source: Stortingsmelding 25 (2018–2019) Framtidas forbrukar – grøn, smart og digital 
Developong a circular economy can make resource use more efficient and reduce resource use 
in many areas. There are various examples of circular models in industrial settings in Norway. 
In Mo Industrial Park in North Norway, for example, heat recovery during metal production 
provides energy for use by other industries. The Government wishes Norway to play a 
pioneering role in the development of a green, circular economy that makes better use of 
resources. 
48 
  
A more circular economy can improve resource efficiency and play a part in:  
•  achieving a low-emission development pathway and reducing greenhouse gas 
emissions;  
•  reducing pollution;  
•  reducing pressure on the environment and natural resources;  
•  green value creation and green competitiveness. 
 
Norway’s consumer policy, together with its climate and environmental policy, is intended to 
drive the development of new sustainable solutions by facilitating cooperation between the 
business sector, authorities and civil society.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
 