 
Belgium's long-term strategy 
 
1. International and European context 
In 2015, the Paris Agreement was concluded in the context of the United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). The main objective of this accord is to limit the rise in global 
temperatures to well below 2°C, and to aim for a maximum increase of 1.5°C (compared to pre-
industrial levels). To this end, the different parties to the accord have presented a  Nationally 
Determined Contribution for 2025/2030. Moreover, all parties are invited to draw up a long-term 
strategy for low greenhouse gas emissions development and submit it to the UNFCCC by 2020. 
In preparation for the EU's long-term strategy to be presented to the UNFCCC in 2020, in November 
2018 the European Commission published its long-term strategic vision "A clean planet for all", which 
aims to build a prosperous, modern, competitive and climate-neutral economy by 20501. According to 
the Commission, this ambition is in line with the 1.5°C objective of the Paris Accord. The vision of the 
Commission has been accompanied by a detailed and in-depth analysis, with different scenarios 
exploring how climate neutrality can be achieved by 2050. At the European Council of 12 and 13 
December 2019, European Heads of Government endorsed the objective of a climate-neutral Europe 
by 2050, and the Commission was invited to prepare a proposal for a long-term strategy as early as 
possible in 2020, with a view to its adoption by the Council and submission to the UNFCCC. Article 15 
of the Governance Regulation (EU Regulation 2018/1999) also requires each Member State to prepare 
and submit a long-term strategy to the European Commission before 1 January 2020. 
With this long-term strategy, Belgium intends to fulfil its commitments under the Paris Agreement and 
the European Governance Regulation, and provide a clear framework for its citizens and businesses. 
2. Belgian context and approach 
Belgium is a federal state in which decision-making power is shared between a federal state, three 
regions (Walloon, Flemish and Brussels-Capital) and three Communities (Flemish, French and German-
speaking). As regards climate policy, the regions have important responsibilities in areas such as 
rational  use  of  energy,  promotion  of  renewable  energy  sources,  public  transport,  transport 
infrastructure, urban and rural planning, agriculture and waste management. The federal state is 
responsible for a large part of fiscal policy. It is also responsible for product policy (standards, quality 
of fuels, labelling and performance standards for electrical appliances for domestic or industrial use, 
etc.). It is responsible for the security of the country's energy supply and nuclear energy. It oversees 
territorial waters and is therefore responsible for the development of offshore wind farms. 
For the development of Belgium's long-term strategy, each region has drawn up its own strategy, 
approved at its level of government. These regional strategies are annexed to the present document. 
The federal level intends to cooperate with the regional entities and support them in their transition 
to a climate-neutral society. To this end, the federal administration has prepared a vision document 
containing various strategic workstreams and concrete levers that can be deployed to support the 
transition from the federal level. 
 
1 Climate neutrality means a global equilibrium between the emission and absorption of greenhouse gases. 
1 
  
The summary of the policies (point 4) provides an overview of the main common elements of the 
regional  strategies,  as  well  as  various  elements  that  the  federal  level  could  deploy  within  its 
competences.  
3. Public consultations 
Taking into account the above-mentioned approach, whereby each region has developed its own long-
term strategy, the regions have also been able to decide separately on the organisation of public 
consultations. 
Various  stakeholder  and  public  consultations  on  climate  and  energy  policy  have  already  been 
organised in recent years, both at the Belgian level (e.g. in the context of the inter-federal energy pact 
and the Belgian national energy-climate plan) and at the regional level (in the context of regional 
strategies and policy plans). Moreover, in recent years, various studies and technical explorations on 
the long-term scenarios for reducing greenhouse gases have been conducted (both at national and 
regional level). For reasons of efficiency, each entity has chosen to base its strategy on existing research 
and stakeholder input, rather than holding an additional public consultation. Each region has also 
stated in its strategy that it should not be seen as an end point. Each region undertakes to develop 
processes for the coming months/years to further discuss the regional strategies with the public and 
the various experts and stakeholders involved, and to substantiate and elaborate them in more detail 
if necessary.  The federal level also intends to cooperate and support the different levels of government 
and stakeholders in elaborating the elements referred to.  
The attached regional strategies provide more detailed information on how the existing research and 
stakeholder inputs have been incorporated and what further steps are envisaged: 
•  Walloon Region: see chapters 1.4 and 1.5  
•  Flemish Region: see introduction, pages 5 to 8 
•  Brussels-Capital Region: see chapter 3.3 
4. Summary of the policies 
4.1 General level of ambition 
The long-term strategies of the regions envisage the following overall emissions reductions by 2050: 
•  The long-term strategy of Wallonia aims to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050, by a reduction 
of greenhouse gas emissions by 95% compared to 1990, supplemented by measures regarding 
carbon capture and use, and negative emissions (see also chapters 2 and 2.1 of the Walloon 
strategy); 
•  The long-term strategy of Flanders aims to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from the so-
called non-ETS sectors by 85% by 2050 compared to 2005, with the ambition to move towards 
full  climate  neutrality.  As  regards  the  sectors  covered  by  the  ETS,  the  Flemish  Region 
subscribes to the context set out by the EU for these sectors with a decreasing emissions quota 
(see also chapter 2.1 of the Flemish strategy); 
•  The long-term strategy of the Brussels-Capital Region sets the objective of moving closer to 
the European target of carbon neutrality by 2050, in the urbanised context of Brussels (see 
also chapter 4.1 of the Brussels-Capital strategy). 
The federal level does not have its own reduction target, in percentage terms, since all Belgian 
greenhouse gas emissions are covered by the emissions of the regions. 
2 
  
Besides the ambitions to reduce direct greenhouse gas emissions, the different regions are also 
working - to varying degrees - to limit indirect emissions and their carbon footprint. The attached 
regional strategies provide more detailed information (see for example point 4.2 of the Walloon 
strategy, the introduction to the Flemish strategy and point 4.2 of the Brussels-Capital strategy).  
4.2 Expected emissions levels by sector 
In accordance with the requirements of the Governance Regulation, the regional strategies contain 
information on the expected emission levels by sector in 2050. The table below presents these 
expected emission levels at the Belgian level. Nonetheless, it is important to take into account the 
following observations in this regard: 
 
•  The nature of the expected emissions levels by sector differs between regions and sometimes 
even between sectors within a region. For example, the Flemish strategy contains 'expected 
indicative contributions' per sector, while the Walloon strategy refers to the results of the 
'Wallonie Bas Carbone' (Low Carbon) study, in which the sectoral reductions were taken into 
account in an 80% reduction scenario. The table below therefore in no way contains strict 
sectoral targets at the Belgian level, but is intended instead to illustrate the expected 
emissions levels per sector at the Belgian level on the basis of the three regional strategies. 
The nature and source (including underlying assumptions) of the regional figures are specified 
in the annexed regional strategies; 
•  The figures for 2030 in the table below are based on the regional WAM scenarios as elaborated 
in the Belgian NECP2; 
•  The Flemish strategy does not contain a quantified estimate of the expected emissions levels 
in 2050 for Flemish industry covered by the ETS. In the table below, the expected level of 
emissions from Belgian industry has therefore been calculated as the sum of Walloon and 
Brussels industry (ETS + non-ETS) and Flemish non-ETS industry, with the proviso that Flemish 
industry covered by the ETS needs to be added. Furthermore, industrial emissions (historical 
+ expected) are not included in the total figure in the last row of the table; 
•  The emissions figures for the transport sector do not include international aviation and 
maritime transport; 
•  The LULUCF sector is not included in the table below; 
 
Table 1: Historical and expected emission levels per sector in Belgium (in Mt CO  eq.) 
2
 
   199  0  2005  2017  2030  2050  2005-2050 
             
Electricity  23.0  23.2  13.2  /  0.0  -100% 
 
Industry  57.2  50.6  38.7  /  /  / 
-  ETS  43.0  30.5  /  /  / 
-  Non-ETS  7.6  8.2  5.1  1.3 to 1.9  -76% to -83% 
 
Trans port  21.1  26.7  25.9  19.6  0.0  -100% 
 
Build ings  25.0  27.4  20.7  15.9  2.5 to 2.9  -89% to –91% 
 
2The NECP, including all underlying figures and assumptions, can be accessed via this link: 
https://www.nationalenergyclimateplan.be/en. 
3 
  
 
 
Agricu lture  15.3  12.8  12.4  9.9  6.3 to 7.0  -45% to -51% 
 
Waste  5.1  4.5  3.7  1.9  0.1 to 0.2  -95% to 98% 
             
Total non-ETS    79.0  70.9  52.63  10.2 to 12.0  -85% to -87% 
 
Given that the scope of the different regional strategies varies (not all of them include the ETS), it is 
not possible to aggregate the regional levels of ambition in a way that shows the overall Belgian target 
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The above table shows that, on the basis of the regional 
strategies, the emissions from Belgian non-ETS sectors would be reduced by 85% to 87% by 2050 
compared to 2005. 
4.3 Key levers by sector 
Each regional strategy addresses the key changes and breakthroughs4 required in each sector to 
achieve the envisaged emissions reductions. Each region has incorporated its own emphases and 
priorities. However, a number of recurring key elements can be identified. These common elements 
are briefly summarised below5. The elements with which the federal level could support the regions in 
their transition are then briefly described. 
 
The electricity sector 
Each region acknowledges that electricity production must be completely climate neutral by 20506. 
For this reason, each strategy places a strong emphasis on renewable energy sources, including solar 
and wind power, taking into account the potential of each region. The strategies differ somewhat on 
the role of biomass in the electricity mix: in the Walloon and Flemish strategies, the use of sustainable 
biomass for energy purposes still has a role to play (taking into account the cascade principle), whereas 
in the Brussels strategy, the use of biofuels is deemed unsuitable in an urban context, given the impact 
on air quality. 
Each region also anticipates that electrification - combined with a climate-neutral electricity supply - 
will contribute significantly to the reduction of greenhouse gases in other sectors, primarily transport 
(e.g. electric vehicles), buildings (e.g. heat pumps) and industry. 
At the same time, each strategy states that the clean potential for renewable electricity generation 
(and power generation in general) is insufficient to fully cover anticipated future demand. Each region 
therefore gives an important role in its long-term strategy to imports of climate-neutral electricity (and 
other energy sources).  The strategies of the Flemish and Walloon Regions also highlight the need for 
a reform of the current centralised and demand-driven energy system towards a decentralised and 
 
3= 52.4 Mt CO eq. from the sectors non-ETS industry, buildings, transport, agriculture and waste + 0.2 Mt 
2
CO eq. from the non-ETS electricity sector, which is not differentiated in Table 1. 
2
4 In the Walloon strategy, these elements are referred to as 'guidelines', the Flemish strategy uses the term 
'bouwstenen' (building blocks), and in the Brussels strategy these elements are described in the 'strategic 
development' of each sector.  
5 For a complete overview, see the regional strategies in annex. 
6 The Walloon and Brussels strategies refer to an energy mix based entirely on renewable energy sources, while 
the Flemish strategy refers to a gradual but complete phase-out of fossil emissions in the electricity mix by 
2050.  
4 
  
flexible system, as well as the need for electricity storage solutions for both the short term (e.g. 
batteries) and long term (e.g. Power-to-X). 
Within the scope of its competences, the federal level can support the transition in the energy sector, 
among other things by exploiting the potential of offshore wind energy as much as possible, and by 
focusing on demand management, energy storage and the interconnection/integration of Belgium into 
the European electricity grid and the possible construction of the necessary infrastructure for the 
import of carbon neutral energy sources. With these levers, the federal level is helping to ensure a 
reliable, affordable and climate-neutral energy supply and to facilitate electrification in other sectors. 
Furthermore, the federal level, in consultation with the regions, could support the transition by: 
-  Having a long-term vision for electricity supply; 
-  Constructing transport infrastructure for green hydrogen and synthetic fuels; 
-  Implementing a long-term framework for the integration of intermittent sources by all actors; 
-  Supporting an active role for citizens. 
 
Industry 
Both the Walloon and Flemish strategies7 recognise that industry still remains an important source of 
greenhouse gases, and therefore envisage a far-reaching transition of their industry towards climate-
friendly production systems. Flanders highlights the importance of preventing carbon leakage through 
effective measures so that emissions are actually reduced, not simply shifted somewhere else in the 
world.  
In this context, it also underscores the need for major technological breakthroughs and new innovative 
industrial models. Both strategies identify the following common levers: 
In the industrial sectors themselves, the efforts will first and foremost continue to improve energy 
efficiency. An important point of attention in this respect is using waste heat as much as possible, both 
within plants and via the heating networks.  Moreover, the shift to renewable and climate-neutral 
energy carriers and raw materials will help reduce emissions further. To this end, both direct 
electrification and other climate-neutral energy carriers such as green hydrogen and other synthetic 
fuels are envisaged. Biofuels will also have a role to play, in particular for industrial emissions where 
electrification or other carbon-free energy carriers are not an option. However, both strategies state 
that using biomass as a raw material is preferable to its combustion as a fuel. Finally, according to both 
strategies, carbon capture offers other possibilities for reducing emissions, either through storage 
(CCS) or use (CCU).  
In a broader context, each strategy (including that of the Brussels-Capital Region) highlights the 
importance of a transition to a circular economy, in which products are designed, produced and 
consumed with an alternative approach. In addition to creating added value and reducing consumption 
of raw materials, the transition to a circular economy should also make a significant contribution to 
the reduction of greenhouse gases, both in the industrial sector and in other sectors (see also section 
4.5 below). 
 
7 The long-term strategy for Brussels does not devote a specific chapter to the industry sector, on account of its 
very limited share in the greenhouse gas emissions of the Brussels-Capital Region. Nonetheless, it devotes a 
chapter to the reduction of fluorinated gases and refers in general terms to (translation) "initiatives to develop 
carbon-free production models, towards a circular and renewable economy ...". 
5 
  
Within the scope of its competences, in particular in the areas of product standardisation and taxation, 
the federal level can contribute to the transition to a circular economy, for example by fostering longer 
service life, more possibilities to repair, more possibilities to disassemble and lower material intensity 
of products. 
 
Transport 
The three regions envisage reducing emissions from the transport sector to zero by 2050, for both 
passenger and freight transport8. To this end, the regional strategies emphasise the following common 
elements: 
 
Each  strategy  primarily  focuses  on  management/rationalisation  of  transport  demand,  with  an 
emphasis on digitisation, efficient land use planning and a circular economy with shorter local value 
chains, thereby reducing the need for freight transport.  
 
Moreover, each of the regional strategies stresses the importance of modal shift as the cornerstone 
for achieving the stated climate ambitions, with additional benefits in terms of air quality, mobility and 
use of the public space. As regards passenger transport, each region aims to limit the share of private 
cars in the modal split, in favour of alternative modes such as active transport (walking and cycling), 
light electric vehicles (e-bikes, speedelecs, electric scooters, etc.) and shared modes of transport (public 
transport and carsharing. To this end, they focus on a high quality offering of alternative modes, 
adequate infrastructure and the promotion of combined mobility9. The concept of Mobility-as-a-
Service is also acknowledged as being an important lever to achieve the objective of combined mobility 
and to increase the vehicle occupancy rate (which translates into a reduction in the number of 
kilometres travelled per vehicle). As regards freight transport, the Walloon and Flemish strategies both 
aim at a shift from road to rail and inland waterways.  
 
Finally, as the final element in the transport sector, regional strategies include a shift to zero-emission 
vehicles and energy carriers. As regards passenger transport, the Walloon and Flemish strategies 
primarily focus on zero-emission vehicles (battery or hydrogen powered)10. Also for freight transport, 
both regions aspire to achieve completely carbon-free traffic11, although they acknowledge that this is 
a considerable challenge which will require new technological developments. Besides electrification 
and hydrogen, alternative fuels, including biofuels and synthetic fuels, are given an important role, 
especially for heavy freight transport. The Brussels-Capital strategy highlights plans to ban diesel cars 
from circulation as of 2030, and petrol and LPG cars from 2035, so that transport will also be largely 
carbon-free by 2050.  
 
 
8 The Walloon strategy refers to being completely carbon-free, the Flemish strategy emphasises zero emissions 
for transport and the Brussels strategy also believes that it is possible to make transport largely carbon-free by 
2050, provided that the modal shift to alternatives to private cars has happened, and that the electricity used 
for transport is renewable in origin. 
9 This means that a single journey is made using multiple modes of transport, with the user using the most 
appropriate means of transport for each part of the journey and being able to switch easily from one mode to 
another.  
10 The Walloon strategy states that the long-term priority is electrification, given that the energy efficiency of 
electric vehicles is 2 to 3 times higher than that of thermally powered vehicles. The Flemish strategy states that 
batteries and hydrogen fuel cells are the only existing zero-emission alternative.  
11 The Walloon strategy envisages passenger vehicles being completely carbon-free. The Flemish strategy refers 
to a complete shift to zero-emission vehicles. 
6 
  
Finally, the Walloon and Flemish strategies recognise the need to reduce greenhouse gas emissions 
from international aviation and maritime transport, in particular via alternative climate-friendly fuels.  
 
Among  other  things,  the  federal  level  will  ensure  an  efficient  rail  network  with  sufficient 
interconnections with neighbouring countries, to facilitate growth in the share of rail in passenger and 
freight transport. In addition, through its competence for taxation and product standardisation, it can 
support the transition to alternative modes of transport and zero-emission vehicles.  
 
Buildings 
Each of the strategies focuses on significantly improving the energy efficiency of the building stock by 
2050. To this end, each region proposes ambitious standards for new constructions, and accelerated 
and significant improvement of the energy performance of the existing building stock by 2050 
(primarily through extensive renovation, but also demolition and reconstruction where appropriate). 
The  following  objectives  have  been  incorporated  in  accordance  with  the  regional  renovation 
strategies: 
•  Walloon  strategy:  average  target  equivalent  to  primary  energy  consumption12  ≤85 
kWh/m2/year for the residential building stock; 
•  Flemish  strategy:  average  target  equivalent  to  primary  energy  consumption13  ≤100 
kWh/m2/year for the residential building stock, to be differentiated in more detail by type of 
building; 
•  Brussels  strategy:  average  target  equivalent  to  primary  energy  consumption14  ≤100 
kWh/m2/year for the complete building stock; 
•  As regards the tertiary sector, each region is aiming for an energy-neutral or carbon-neutral 
building stock by 2050 in terms of heating, hot water production, cooling and lighting.  
Moreover, for the remaining energy demand, each strategy envisages an adaptation of the energy mix 
to further reduce greenhouse gas emissions: 
•  The Walloon strategy envisages that by 2050, the vast majority of buildings will use carbon-
neutral energy sources for the production of heat and hot water. This will be primarily via heat 
pumps, but also through the use of biomass, solar heat, cogeneration and (mainly in cities) 
heat networks. If, in exceptional cases (e.g. in listed buildings), fossil fuels are still used, this 
will be via highly efficient technologies; 
•  The Flemish strategy also aims to make the energy supply of buildings more sustainable by 
2050. Wherever possible, it is focusing on heating networks, which are supplied with waste 
heat  or  centrally-produced  green  heat.  For  more  scattered  buildings,  solar  heat  and 
electrification (primarily heat pumps) will be prioritised; 
•  The Brussels strategy envisages that the reduction of energy consumption in buildings will be 
accompanied by an increased use of renewable energies adapted to the urban context, the 
main examples being solar thermal and photovoltaic energy combined with heat pumps. 
Finally,  various  other  levers  are  proposed  in  the  regional  strategies  to  further  reduce  energy 
consumption and support the integration of renewable/climate neutral energy sources. The Flemish 
strategy, for example, focuses on a number of spatial aspects (compactness, orientation, flexibility and 
 
12 In accordance with the method of calculating the EPB certification of existing properties  
13 idem 
14 idem 
7 
  
adaptability) and on a more efficient use of the available space (e.g. by sharing space) in order to 
further reduce energy consumption. Conversely, the Walloon strategy believes that behavioural 
change can play an important role in the evolution towards more rational energy consumption.  
Within the scope of its competences for taxation, the federal level can support both an accelerated 
and deep renovation of the building stock and a greening of the energy mix. The federal level will also 
ensure that its own building stock is fully energy and climate neutral by 2040.  
 
Waste 
Although the waste sector is not the subject of a separate chapter in the regional strategies, this issue 
is covered in the sections dealing with other sectors (primarily under the heading 'industry' in the 
Walloon  and  Flemish strategies,  and  under  the  heading  'electricity  production'  in  the  Brussels 
strategy). In their strategies, each of the regions gives pride of place to the circular economy in the 
context of the efforts to achieve their climate ambitions (alongside other objectives such as, first and 
foremost, the management of raw and other materials). As a result, the gradual but complete phasing 
out (in Flanders and Brussels), or at least a very strong reduction, of landfilling or incineration of waste 
by 2050 is envisaged, which will make it possible to virtually eliminate all greenhouse gas emissions.  
 
Agriculture 
Although the Walloon and Flemish strategies focus on the specific characteristics of their respective 
agricultural sectors, it is possible to identify a number of common elements, which can be grouped 
under three pillars: 
(1)  the  levers  within  the  agricultural  system:  both  strategies  are  aimed  at  adaptations  and 
improvements within the agricultural system, leading to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions: the 
emphasis is on smart farming and precision farming (to minimise the input of raw materials and energy 
and maximise yield), practices to increase nitrogen efficiency (e.g., better manure management), and 
the application of techniques to reduce enteric emissions from livestock (e.g., genetic selection and 
adapted feed rations). Both strategies also place a strong emphasis on energy efficiency and the 
greening of the energy mix in order to significantly reduce energy emissions15 from the agricultural 
sector.  
2) the link with LULUCF and biomass: in addition, the Walloon and Flemish strategies stress that the 
agricultural sector can make an important contribution as a producer of biomass and biofuels (not only 
through the direct production of energy crops, but also by exploiting secondary flows such as the 
fermentation  of  animal  manure  to  extract  biomethane)  and  through  carbon  sequestration  on 
agricultural land (see also the separate section below).  
3) the levers within the food system: finally, a number of levers will be deployed within the wider food 
system to mobilise the potential for reduction. In this context, the main emphasis is on reducing food 
waste, maximising the use of food residues and other secondary flows, and adapting consumption 
patterns towards more local and seasonal products and healthier food.  
 
15 This component is especially relevant for the Flemish strategy, given the significant energy consumption in 
the Flemish greenhouse horticulture sector. In the Walloon agricultural sector, energy emissions are already 
relatively low due to the limited presence of greenhouse horticulture. 
8 
  
The Brussels-Capital strategy only devotes limited space to the agricultural sector, namely on account 
of its very small share in the region's greenhouse gas emissions. In this area, its strategy primarily 
focuses on the development of urban agriculture which, in addition to climate change mitigation (e.g. 
less food transport), offers various benefits (greening, employment, social cohesion, etc.). 
 
LULUCF 
Finally, efforts are envisaged to maintain or enhance carbon sequestration in soils and biomass. These 
include expanding green spaces (forests, natural areas, parks, etc.), sustainable forest and nature 
management and the encouragement of agricultural practices that favour carbon sequestration on 
agricultural land. In this respect, more information is available in the regional strategies in the annexes, 
see in particular chapter 3.6.1. of the Flemish strategy and chapters 2.1.1. and 3.5. of the Walloon 
strategy.  
Each strategy also covers potential synergies with climate change adaptation. For example, carbon-
rich agricultural soils are more resistant to periods of drought or flooding, expanding green spaces is a 
protective  measure  against  expected  heat  waves  (especially  in  urban  areas)  and  the  sound 
management of our forests can increase their resilience to climate change. 
4.4 Key levers of adaptation policy 
Belgium is already witnessing the consequences of climate change, and the impact is expected to 
increase with the rise in average global temperatures. The country must therefore organise itself to 
adapt to the expected or already observed consequences and to manage the related risks.  
A range of measures have already been taken: as early as 2010, Belgium adopted a National Adaptation 
Strategy16, which envisaged the elaboration of a National Adaptation Plan17. This plan was adopted by 
the National Climate Commission in 2017 to strengthen cooperation and develop synergies between 
the different entities. To this end, the adaptation policies already implemented by the different entities 
were mapped and new national measures were identified in order to strengthen Belgium's resilience 
against the expected effects of climate change.  
In accordance with the requirements of the Governance Regulation, the long-term strategies of the 
three regions include a component on the main aspects of their adaptation policy up to 2050. This 
strand addresses various common elements, including the importance of enhancing our resilience 
against droughts and floods, increased heat waves (especially in urban environments subject to the 
heat  island effect)  and the  various  risks  related  to  climate  change  in  specific  sectors  (forests, 
agriculture, industry, the energy system, etc.). The attached regional strategies provide further 
information on this subject: 
•            Walloon Region: see chapter 7.3.  
•            Flemish Region: see chapter 4.2. 
•            Brussels-Capital Region: see chapter 6.3  
 
16The National Adaptation Strategy is available at: 
https://www.klimaat.be/files/1513/8269/7947/NASpublicatiedruk.pdf. 
17The National Adaptation Plan is available at: https://www.klimaat.be/files/6714/9880/5758/NAP_NL.pdf. 
9 
  
The regions will prepare and implement a new national plan for the period 2021-2030, taking into 
account a long-term vision. Through strategies, plans, studies and expert consultations, the regions are 
working to enhance their resilience against climate change risks.  
4.5 Cross-cutting focus points 
Each entity also covers a number of cross-cutting focus points which are relevant to the long-term 
strategy. This chapter presents the common focus points to achieve a successful transition. 
A socially just transition 
The transition to be made by Belgium is a challenge for society as a whole. Both the regions and the 
federal level stress the importance of a socially just transition in which no one is left behind. To this 
end, the regions are looking to implement measures for broad public participation, social consultation, 
appropriate training for new professions and support for low-income and other vulnerable target 
groups most exposed to the impact of this transition. Specific efforts will be made to tackle energy 
poverty.  
A secure and sufficient supply of sustainable and affordable energy 
Both the Flemish and Walloon strategies recognise the need for a secure and sufficient supply of 
sustainable and affordable energy for Belgian citizens and businesses by 2050. Overcoming this 
challenge is crucial if the transition is to take place with a social dimension, while safeguarding the 
competitiveness of our companies.  
To this end, the Flemish and Walloon strategies propose various measures which are also discussed in 
section 4.3, such as improving efficiency (in all sectors), exploiting the clean renewable energy 
potential, developing a flexible and decentralised energy system (including energy storage and 
demand side management). The three regions also recognise that Belgium will continue to be 
dependent on (climate neutral) energy imports. As such, in order to realise the regional strategies, a 
secure and sufficient supply of sustainable and affordable energy from abroad is vital.  
Innovation and R&D 
Each of the strategies emphasises the importance of innovation and R&D. Each acknowledges the need 
for technological breakthroughs and innovations to achieve significant emissions reductions in sectors 
that are difficult to make carbon-free, or even negative emissions in the long term. In addition, the 
importance of 'system innovations' is underscored (new business models, sharing systems, etc.). The 
regions also indicate that the success of the transition will depend on support for the development of 
innovations to move towards a more circular economy. 
Investments and financing  
The regional strategies pay particular attention to funding needs. In effect, the transition requires 
significant investment in all the sectors concerned, and can therefore only be achieved with adequate 
funding. The Brussels and Flemish strategies already include an initial estimate of the expected funding 
needs (based on existing studies), and all entities will continue their work to identify these needs more 
precisely.  
To meet the funding needs, each regional strategy proposes specific emphases. The attached regional 
strategies provide further information on this subject: 
10 
  
•  Walloon Region: chapter 5. 
•  Flemish Region: chapter 5.4. 
•  Brussels-Capital Region: chapter 7.3 
Circular economy 
Finally, each entity expects that the circular economy will make a major contribution to achieving the 
climate ambitions in the different sectors. Indeed, the circular economy is expected to lead to a 
reduction in demand for primary raw materials and commodities in favour of high-value finished 
products and new services (e.g. repair services), a reduction in transport needs, a more efficient use 
of available space, a better valorisation of secondary flows (both energy and raw material) and a near-
total phase-out of emissions in the waste sector. The regional strategies therefore place important 
emphasis on applying the principles of the circular economy in the different sectors. Besides reducing 
direct emissions, this approach will bring additional benefits, such as reducing Belgium's carbon and 
materials footprint, creating local economic opportunities and jobs, and reducing dependence on 
imports of (scarce) materials.  
 
11 
 