 
 
Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Finland’s long-term low greenhouse gas 
emission development strategy 
 
 
October 2020 
 
 
 
 
Unofficial translation 
 
 
 
   1 
   
 
 
Contents 
1 OVERVIEW AND PROCESS FOR ESTABLISHING THE PLAN ............................................... 2 
1.1 Executive summary .................................................................................................................... 2 
1.2 Legal and policy context ............................................................................................................ 3 
1.3 Public consultation ..................................................................................................................... 4 
2 TOTAL GHG EMISSION REDUCTIONS AND ENHANCEMENTS OF REMOVALS BY 
SINKS .................................................................................................................................................. 6 
2.1 National targets .......................................................................................................................... 6 
2.2 Scenarios underlying the national long-term strategy................................................................ 7 
2.3 Estimated trends in emissions and removals by 2050................................................................ 9 
2.4 Adaptation policies and measures ............................................................................................ 10 
3 RENEWABLE ENERGY ............................................................................................................... 13 
4 ENERGY EFFICIENCY ................................................................................................................ 15 
5 SECTOR-SPECIFIC RELATED CONTENT ................................................................................ 17 
5.1 Energy system .......................................................................................................................... 17 
5.2 Industry .................................................................................................................................... 19 
5.3 Transport .................................................................................................................................. 21 
5.4 Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) and agriculture ....................................... 23 
5.5 Waste sector ............................................................................................................................. 30 
6 FINANCING ................................................................................................................................... 32 
6.1 Estimates of investment needed ............................................................................................... 32 
6.2 Policies and measures for related research, development and innovation ............................... 33 
7 IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC ASPECTS .......................................... 34 
7.1 Environmental impact assessments .......................................................................................... 34 
7.2 National economic impact assessments ................................................................................... 34 
ANNEXES ......................................................................................................................................... 39 
 
   
 2 
   
 
 
1   OVERVIEW AND PROCESS FOR ESTABLISHING THE PLAN 
1.1 Executive summary 
Finland’s long-term strategy (LTS) is based on the agreement of the twenty-first session of the Parties 
to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Paris, 30 November to 11 
December 2015, also known as the ‘Paris Agreement’. 
According to the Article 4, paragraph 19, of the Paris Agreement, “All Parties should strive to 
formulate and communicate long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies, mindful 
of Article 2 taking into account their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective 
capabilities, in the light of different national circumstances.” 
This long-term strategy is to its content identical to the long-term strategy that Finland submitted to 
the European Commission in March 2020. The long-term strategy submitted to the Commission is 
based  on  Regulation  (EU)  2018/1999  of  the  European  Parliament  and  of  the  Council  on  the 
Governance of the Energy Union and Climate Action, also known as the ‘Governance Regulation’, 
and its Article 15,  which requires each Member State to prepare and submit to the Commission its 
comprehensive long-term strategy by 1 January 2020. 
Finland’s long-term strategy lays out scenarios and impact assessments concerning the national 
carbon neutrality target set for 2035 and developments in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and 
removals by 2050. The strategy explores the following three scenarios. Alongside the reference 
scenario depicting the development achievable with current policy measures, known as the ‘With 
Existing Measures’ (WEM) scenario, the strategy presents two alternative low-emission scenarios, 
known as the ‘Continuous Growth’ and ‘Savings’ scenarios. The Continuous Growth and Savings 
scenarios describe alternative pathways to achieve the emission reduction target set by Finland and 
the European Union by 2050. In order to achieve Finland’s national emission reduction targets, the 
emission reduction potential and needs are also assessed by sector in the medium (by 2035) and long 
(by 2050) term. The long-term strategy does not consider the transition to a low-emission society 
from the perspective of regional or social justice; instead, its underlying calculations are based on the 
premise that emission reduction costs will be minimised across the country. 
The long-term strategy does not identify the sectors to which emission reductions should be allocated; 
nor do the impact assessments derived from the scenarios include any quantitative analysis of the 
concrete measures or political decisions that would be required to achieve the carbon neutrality target 
or the 2050 targets considered here. The allocation of emission reductions and policy measures, 
including those for the land use sector, will be decided in 2020–2021 as part of the process of drafting 
the Climate and Energy Strategy, the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan, the roadmap for 
fossil-free transport and the climate programme for the land use sector. 
The 2050 target for GHG emission reductions under the Continuous Growth scenario is 87.5% 
compared to 1990 levels (excl. the land use sector), while the corresponding target under the Savings 
scenario stands at 90%. Furthermore, both low-emission scenarios achieve the 2035 carbon neutrality 
target, which is in line with the Government Programme. Instead of setting any specific quantitative 
carbon-negative target beyond 2035, its level was allowed to be determined by the size of the net 
carbon sink of the land use sector. 
With existing measures (WEM), carbon neutrality will not be achieved until 2050 – and even then 
only with land use net sinks at about 30 Mt CO -eq. Conversely, the Continuous Growth and Savings 
2
 3 
   
 
 
scenarios will achieve carbon neutrality in 2035, but this requires substantial reductions in greenhouse 
gas emissions over the 2030–2035 period while also keeping the size of forest carbon sinks at a 
reasonable level. 
Achieving the carbon neutrality target by 2035 requires swift measures and political decisions geared 
towards reducing greenhouse gas emissions across all sectors while also strengthening land use net 
sinks when compared with current levels. The low-emission scenario calculations suggest that 
significant reductions by 2035, not only in energy production, but also in transport and industry, are 
a prerequisite for reaching the carbon neutrality target. 
The differences between the low-emission scenarios in terms of emission reduction trajectories can 
be attributed to their underlying technology assumptions, on the one hand, and to assumptions on the 
structures of industry, society and the economy as a whole, on the other. Perhaps the most essential 
of the technology assumptions is related to the opportunities to make use of carbon capture and 
storage (CCS). Based on the scenario parameters, this will become reality under the Savings scenario 
after 2030, whereas the Continuous Growth scenario will fail to do so throughout  the period 
considered. The absence of CCS from the means available under the Continuous Growth scenario 
will lead to extremely stringent emission reduction measures across all sectors, including agriculture 
and industrial processes, which are identified in technical-economic assessments as the sectors where 
it will be most difficult to make substantial reductions in emissions. The input assumptions of forest 
industry development in Finland, in turn, are closely linked to the development of land use net sinks 
and, consequently, to the level of GHG emission reductions required to reach carbon neutrality. The 
Savings scenario assumed that the forest industry would develop and expand, which would also lead 
to a growing demand for domestic wood raw material. Under the Savings scenario, the circular and 
sharing economies and significantly increasing energy efficiency are key elements in reaching the 
emission reduction target. This scenario also invested relatively more in sustainable biorefinery 
production, while demand for biorefinery products was also slightly higher to account for the growing 
demand in heavy-duty road transport. Uncertainties relating to forest carbon sinks have a fundamental 
impact on achieving the carbon neutrality target. 
1.2 Legal and policy context 
The Programme of Prime Minister Sanna Marin’s Government of 10 December 2019 states as 
follows: “The Government will work to ensure that Finland is carbon neutral by 2035 and carbon 
negative  soon  after  that.  We  will  do  this  by  accelerating  emissions  reduction  measures  and 
strengthening carbon sinks.” The Government will decide on the additional actions needed to bring 
the emission reduction path in line with the goal of achieving carbon neutrality by 2035. The 
Government has established a ministerial working group on climate and energy issues to prepare 
climate policy as a whole. The ministerial working group is chaired by Krista Mikkonen, Minister of 
the Environment and Climate Change. 
Besides the timetable for the carbon neutrality target and the related emission reduction path, another 
key issue for Finland is the development of land use net sinks by 2050. These were addressed in the 
autumn of 2019 by launching the PITKO follow-up study to assess the long-term trend in total 
emissions1 and the MALUSEPO project on the scenarios for greenhouse gas emissions and removals 
in the agricultural and LULUCF sectors by 2050. The projects aimed to update some of the earlier 
                                                 
1 Finland’s opportunities to transition to a low-carbon society were explored in the PITKO project carried out in 2018–
2019 to study the long-term trend in total emissions. The project’s key objective was to assess the suitable emission 
reduction target for Finland by 2050 and the primary options to proceed in different sectors in order to achieve the 
target. 
 4 
   
 
 
scenario  calculations  so  as  to  achieve  the  carbon  neutrality  target  set  out  in  the  Government 
Programme. Commissioned by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment, the PITKO 
follow-up study was carried out in cooperation between VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
Ltd, the Finnish Environment Institute SYKE and Merit Economics. The MALUSEPO project, in 
turn, was commissioned by the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry and carried out by the Natural 
Resources Institute Finland (Luke). 
Finland’s long-term strategy is based on the agreement of the twenty-first session of the Parties to the 
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change in Paris, 30 November to 11 December 
2015, also known as the ‘Paris Agreement’. This long-term strategy submitted to the UNFCCC 
Secretariat draws on the results of quantitative and qualitative analyses included in the PITKO follow-
up study report. However, this long-term strategy is not legally binding on Finland and its climate 
policy-making process. 
Finland’s long-term strategy was discussed on several occasions by the Government’s Ministerial 
Working Group on Climate and Energy Policy, which adopted it on 1 April 2020. The strategy has 
not been considered by Parliament. 
1.3 Public consultation 
The preliminary results of the PITKO follow-up study assessing the long-term trend in total emissions 
and emission reduction paths and the MALUSEPO reports evaluating the scenarios for greenhouse 
gas emissions and removals in the agricultural and land use, land-use change and forestry sectors 
were presented at a seminar organised by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Employment on 
15 November 2019. These follow-up studies updated the calculations of the PITKO and MALULU 
reports published in February 2019 to correspond to the 2035 target for a climate-neutral Finland set 
out in the Government Programme. 
The seminar was attended by a wide variety of stakeholders and the audience were also able to ask 
questions and participate in discussions. A recording of the Finnish-language seminar is available at: 
https://www.mediaserver.fi/video/tem/10021/awqz4Q. The study project continued after the seminar 
and was completed on 23 January 2020. 
Finland organised a public consultation on its long-term strategy towards carbon neutrality via the 
central government’s otakantaa.fi service in March 2020. The otakantaa.fi service is part of a broader 
package of democracy services provided by the Ministry of Justice for democratic participation and 
influence to promote mutual dialogue between and participation by citizens, NGOs and public 
authorities. The public consultation was open to all citizens and stakeholders for a period of two 
weeks. 
The consultation requested responses to the following four questions: 
 
1) The 2050 greenhouse gas emission reduction target (excl. the land use sector) is set at 87.5% 
under the Continuous Growth scenario and at 90% under the Savings scenario compared to 1990 
levels. Both of the low-emission scenarios also achieve the 2035 carbon neutrality target. Is the 
2050 target to reduce greenhouse gas emissions ambitious enough and what should Finland’s 
greenhouse gas emission reduction target be for 2050? 
 
2) In  your  opinion,  have  the  long-term  strategy  scenarios  successfully  identified  realistic 
emission reductions, or has something been overlooked? 
 5 
   
 
 
 
3) The land use sector will remain a net sink under all of the scenarios; in other words, the sector’s 
greenhouse gas removals will exceed emissions, increasing its carbon stocks. What measures do 
you consider the most important in the long term to strengthen carbon sinks and stocks and to 
reduce emissions in the land use sector (land use, land-use change and forestry) in Finland? 
 
4) Do you have any other comments concerning the long-term strategy? 
 
A total of 23 parties filled in the survey. A summary of responses received is included in Appendix 
1. Respondents made observations on the scenario calculations and suggested measures to reduce 
emissions, among other things. These aspects could not be taken into account in the context of drafting 
this strategy, but the issues raised will be addressed as part of drafting Finland’s Climate and Energy 
Strategy and the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan, scheduled to start in the spring of 2020. 
   
 6 
   
 
 
2   TOTAL GHG EMISSION REDUCTIONS AND ENHANCEMENTS OF RE-
MOVALS BY SINKS 
2.1 National targets 
The EU Effort Sharing Regulation (EU) 2018/842 includes emission reduction obligations for all EU 
Member States for a period from 2021 to 2030. Under the Regulation, Finland is required to reduce 
its greenhouse gas emissions in sectors outside the EU emissions trading system (EU ETS) by a 
minimum of 39% from 2005 levels by 2030. This is also Finland’s national target. Final annual 
emission allocations will be confirmed when the 2018 emission data has been verified in 2020. This 
is due to the fact that the 2016–2018 emissions will have a bearing on the calculation of the emission 
allocations for the 2021–2030 period. The obligation applies to non-ETS sectors, such as transport, 
agriculture, waste management and heating of buildings. 
The Government’s 2035 carbon neutrality target is based on the Finnish Climate Change Panel’s 
estimate of what the 1.5 °C obligation set out in the Paris Agreement entails for Finland.2 
Carbon neutrality must be pursued with due consideration for the language of Article 2.1(b) of the 
Paris Agreement, which provides that the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change 
and foster climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions development should be increased in 
a manner that does not threaten food production. 
According to its Government Programme, the Government will amend the Climate Change Act 
(609/2015) by updating its 2050 emission reduction target and adding targets for 2030 and 2040 in 
line with the path to carbon neutrality. The land use sector and a target for strengthening carbon sinks 
will also be included in the Climate Change Act. The current goal laid down in the Climate Change 
Act for 2050 is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80% compared to 1990 levels. The Act 
provides that if an international treaty binding on Finland or European Union legislation includes a 
target that differs from that mentioned above, it must be used as the basis for Finland’s target. 
Directing finance flows towards climate-resilient development 
Under the Paris Agreement, all Parties must direct both national and international investment and 
finance flows towards low-carbon and climate-resilient development. Finland has joined forces with 
Chile to establish the Coalition of Finance Ministers for Climate Action, which has already been 
joined by over 50 countries. Their cooperation is based on the so-called Helsinki Principles. Its aim 
is to integrate climate change as part of planning economic policy and financing solutions and to 
identify the most effective instruments available to Finance Ministers to mitigate and adapt to climate 
change. 
                                                 
2 An Approach to Nationally Determined Contributions Consistent with the Paris Climate Agreement and Climate 
Science: Application to Finland and the EU. Finnish Climate Change Panel Report 7/2019. Available at: 
https://www.ilmastopaneeli.fi/wp-content/uploads/2019/10/Finlands-globally-responsible-contribution_final.pdf. 
 
 7 
   
 
 
2.2 Scenarios underlying the national long-term strategy 
Estimates of Finland’s long-term total emission trend3 (PITKO project) and emission trends in 
agriculture and the land use sector4 (MALULU project) were published in February 2019. Both 
research projects were carried out as part of implementing the 2018 Government plan for analysis, 
assessment and research. Both of these projects were continued in follow-up studies launched in the 
autumn of 2019, with a view to updating parts of the qualitative and quantitative analyses to bring the 
premises for calculations and the GHG emission reduction target in line with Prime Minister Sanna 
Marin’s Government Programme. The follow-up studies produced a report entitled ‘Carbon neutral 
Finland 2035 – Scenarios and impact assessments’5, which was published on 23 January 2020. The 
research report’s scenarios form the basis for those included in this Finland’s long-term strategy 
(LTS) under the EU Governance Regulation. 
The premises for modelling the national LTS scenarios were achievement of the Government’s 
objective of carbon neutrality by 2035 across the country and minimisation of emission reduction 
costs. In the context of the Government Programme, ‘carbon neutrality’ refers to a balance between 
Finland’s regional GHG emissions and removals by sinks. According to the Government Programme, 
“Emissions reduction measures will be carried out in a way that is fair from a social and regional 
perspective and that involves all sectors of society.” The allocation of emission reductions and 
measures required for different sectors will be outlined in keeping with the Government Programme 
as part of drafting the Climate and Energy Strategy, the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan 
and the climate programme for the land use sector. The process of drafting these medium-term plans 
will start in the spring of 2020 with the intention of submitting them to Parliament as government 
reports by the autumn of 2021 at the latest. Consequently, the scenarios laid out in the national LTS 
are only indicative of future developments. 
The national LTS lays out three scenarios. The scenarios were prepared through to 2050 in such a 
way that they achieve the 2035 carbon neutrality target. 
The With Existing Measures (WEM) scenario is a reference scenario based on developments in line 
with existing policy measures. The WEM scenario conforms to the premises of the 2016 National 
Energy and Climate Strategy and the 2017 Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan by 2030 while 
extrapolating developments for the 2030–2050 period along the same trendline through to 2050. The 
basic premise of the WEM scenario is that Finland will achieve the national energy and climate policy 
objectives for 2020, which will also remain unchanged beyond that year. The WEM scenario 
therefore projects that emissions in the effort sharing sector will be reduced by 16% on 2005 levels, 
which is equivalent to emissions at 28.4 Mt CO -eq in 2020. The WEM scenario expects that the rest 
2
of the EU Member States will not only achieve the 2020 energy and climate targets but also the 
climate target set for 2030, which means that the EU-level GHG emission target stands at -40% 
compared to 1990 levels. 
The  WEM  scenario’s  key  baseline  data  includes  an  assumption  of  emission  allowance  price 
developments through to 2050 in accordance with the Commission guidance on input assumptions 
                                                 
3 Pitkän aikavälin kokonaispäästökehitys [Long-term development of total emissions] (VTT 2019). Available in Finnish 
(English abstract) at: http://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/handle/10024/161409. 
4 Maatalous- ja LULUCF-sektorien päästö- ja nielukehitys vuoteen 2050 [Development of emissions and sinks in the 
agricultural and LULUCF sectors until 2050] (Luke). Available in Finnish (English abstract) at: 
http://julkaisut.valtioneuvosto.fi/handle/10024/161408. 
5 Hiilineutraali Suomi 2035 – Skenaariot ja vaikutusarviot [Carbon neutral Finland 2035 – Scenarios and impact 
assessments] (VTT). Available in Finnish (English abstract) at: https://www.vtt.fi/inf/pdf/technology/2020/T366.pdf. 
 8 
   
 
 
for the reference scenario. The emission allowance price is assumed to amount to EUR 15/t CO  in 
2
2020 and to EUR 30/t CO  in 2030. After 2030, the allowance price is expected to rise more steeply, 
2
reaching  EUR 50/t CO   in  2040  and  EUR 90/t CO   in  2050.  The  emission  allowance  price 
2 2
developments are based on the so-called PRIMES Reference Scenario from 2016. 
Two alternative low-emission scenarios were developed for this strategy. The Continuous Growth 
and Savings scenarios describe alternative pathways to achieve the emission reduction target set by 
Finland  and  the  European  Union  by  2050.  The  scenarios  were  contextualised  with  ‘scenario 
narratives’. Under the Continuous Growth scenario, emission reduction targets will be achieved by 
accelerated deployment of new technologies, including robust electrification, digitalisation and 
industrial renewal. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies will not be in use in this scenario. 
The scenario projects that Finland will achieve export-driven economic success. Under the Savings 
scenario, the circular and sharing economies and significantly increasing energy efficiency are key 
elements in reaching the emission reduction target. CCS technologies will be in use. Agriculture and 
forestry will promote the circular economy, as will the replacement of mineral oil-based products 
with new bioproducts. 
Under the Continuous Growth scenario, the GHG emission reduction target is 87.5% compared to 
1990 levels, while the corresponding target under the Savings scenario stands at 90%. Furthermore, 
both low-emission scenarios achieve the 2035 carbon neutrality target, which is in line with the 
Government Programme. The low-emission scenarios were assigned a number of energy and climate 
policy targets for 2030, including: 
  a 39% GHG emission reduction target for the effort sharing sector compared to 2005 emission 
levels; 
  phasing out the use of coal for energy by 2029; 
  cutting back the use of peat at least by half by 2030; 
  share of biofuels in road transport energy consumption at 13.5% of the energy content part in 
2020 and at 30% in 2030 (linear growth); a 10% bioliquid blending obligation for light fuel 
oil used in building-specific heating and for diesel oil used in mobile machinery, with linear 
growth between 2020 and 2030; 
  the number of electric vehicles at least 250,000 (full electric vehicles, hydrogen-powered 
vehicles, plug-in hybrids) and, correspondingly, that of gas-powered vehicles at least 50,000 
by 2030; 
  a 38% minimum share of renewable energy in final energy consumption in 2020 and, 
correspondingly, a 50% minimum target for renewable energy in 2030; 
  a 55% self-sufficiency target for energy supply in 2030 and halving the use of imported oil 
for energy purposes. 
More detailed assumptions for the scenarios are presented in Chapter 4 of a Finnish-language research 
report entitled ‘Carbon neutral Finland 2035 – Scenarios and impact assessments’. 
 9 
   
 
 
2.3 Estimated trends in emissions and removals by 2050 
Figure 1 presents the trends in Finland’s GHG emissions by main source under the basic scenario 
(WEM) and under the two low-emission scenarios (excluding LULUCF). The WEM scenario only 
includes existing policy measures by 2020, whereas the low-emission scenarios cover planned 
additional domestic measures, the EU energy and climate policy goals for 2030, and an assumed EU 
target of reducing GHG emissions by at least 85% by 2050. In other words, the overall EU target was 
also assumed to increase to a slightly more ambitious level from the previous 80%. 
Based on the results, total emissions in 2020 amount to a little under 55 Mt CO -eq under the WEM 
2
scenario, standing 23% below 1990 reference year levels. The emission trajectories of the low-
emission scenarios start to clearly diverge from the WEM scenario as early as during the 2020s, such 
that the reduction in total emissions in 2030 compared to 1990 levels will be about 50% under the 
Continuous Growth scenario and about 47% under the Savings scenario. Since the baseline trajectory 
(WEM) uses the European Commission’s reference scenario assumptions on emission allowance 
price developments, emissions will also decrease under the WEM scenario at a relatively steady rate 
after 2030, reaching the level of about 27 Mt CO -eq by 2050, which is already equivalent to quite a 
2
substantial reduction at 63%. 
The 87.5% minimum emission reduction target for 2050 assumed in the Continuous Growth scenario 
will be achieved through domestic measures without carbon capture and storage (CCS), according to 
the scenario’s input assumptions. Conversely, the Savings scenario projects that the targets of both 
carbon neutrality by 2035 and a 90% emission reduction in 2050 will be achieved with support from 
substantial negative emissions largely produced by bio-CCS. In 2050, the emission reduction from 
CCS will amount to a total of about 14 Mt CO -eq. In other words, the reduction achieved in gross 
2
emissions (without negative carbon offsets) under the Savings scenario will stand at about 82% in 
2050. 
 
Figure 1. GHG emission trends by scenario. 
 10 
   
 
 
Appendix  2  provides the  GHG emissions  balances  for  2030  and  2050  compiled  from  system 
modelling results, using the emission inventory classification, excluding LULUCF. 
Figure 13 in Section 5.4 shows net sink trends in the LULUCF sector under different scenarios. While 
all of the three scenarios – WEM, Continuous Growth and Savings – produced diverging trajectories 
for the LULUCF sector, the sector will remain a net sink under all of the scenarios; in other words, 
the sector’s GHG removals will exceed emissions. When compared with the WEM scenario, the net 
sink reached by 2050 is 15 Mt CO -eq larger under the Continuous Growth scenario and 10 Mt CO -
2 2
eq smaller under the Savings scenario. The scenario trends take shape up until 2030, after which point 
their differences become more pronounced. With regard to agriculture, the Continuous Growth and 
Savings scenarios assume a considerable reduction in national consumption of livestock products (-
30% to -50% by 2050). As a result, the arable area under active cultivation will shrink due to declining 
demand for forage area. Indeed, the Continuous Growth and Savings scenarios specifically sought 
emission reductions by focusing measures on agricultural lands. In this context, ‘measures’ mostly 
refer to the types of soil (mineral soil, peatland) that the scenarios project to remain under cultivation 
and the amounts of agricultural land that could be allocated for other uses in their calculations. While 
cropland emissions can be cut down by limiting the agricultural land area, these sites will move under 
other categories and will therefore still be included in LULUCF totals. Changes in agriculture in the 
above-mentioned scenarios will also lead to major changes in agricultural income and working hours 
in agricultural production. 
These scenarios considered afforestation the primary alternative for agricultural land being freed up. 
Although afforestation areas were significant, they show little impact on increasing carbon sinks due 
to the relatively short time span involved and to the fact that the afforestation area is small relative to 
the existing forest land area. 
The scenarios demonstrate the impact of changes in forest sinks on the sector’s balance. Increasing 
the amount of harvested timber will decrease the sinks (Savings) and, vice versa, reducing the amount 
of harvested timber (biomass) will increase the sinks (Continuous Growth). Harvested wood products 
will not fully compensate for decreasing sinks, even if production focused on durable products 
(Savings). 
Net sink trends in the LULUCF sector by 2050 under different scenarios are discussed in more detail 
in Section 5.4. 
2.4 Adaptation policies and measures 
Guidance for adaptation to climate change is based on Finland’s National Climate Change Adaptation 
Plan 2022, which was adopted as a Government Resolution on 20 November 2014. The government 
adopts a national adaptation plan as part of the planning system under the Climate Change Act at least 
once in every ten years. According to the Act, the adaptation plan includes a risk and vulnerability 
review, as well as action plans on adaptations specific to each administrative branch, if necessary. 
The aim of the National Climate Change Adaptation Plan 2022 is to ensure that Finnish society has 
the capacity to adapt to changes in climate and manage the risks associated with climate change. The 
plan sets the following three objectives for 2022: 
a)  Adaptation has been integrated into the planning and activities of both the various sectors and 
their actors. 
 11 
   
 
 
b)  The actors have access to the necessary climate change assessment and management methods. 
c)  Research and development work, communication and education and training have enhanced 
the adaptive capacity of society, developed innovative solutions and improved citizens’ 
awareness on climate change adaptation. 
The Adaptation Plan describes the key actions to be launched in order to achieve the objectives, as 
shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. Key actions to achieve the objectives of the Adaptation Plan. 
In addition to the actions described in the National Adaptation Plan, practical adaptation actions are 
also included in action plans specific to different administrative branches. Such specific adaptation 
action  plans  have  been  drawn  up  within  the  administrative  branches  of  the  Ministry  of  the 
Environment and the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry and another plan is being drafted within 
the administrative branch of the Ministry of Social Affairs and Health. The Ministry of Transport and 
Communications and the Ministry of Defence have included adaptation actions in more extensive 
climate programmes within their respective branches. 
According to the 2019 interim review of the National Adaptation Plan, awareness of climate change 
and adaptation needs has increased among public bodies. The impacts and risks of climate change are 
also currently discussed more widely as part of data production. However, there are still some gaps 
in climate risk management and marked differences between sectors. The adverse effects of climate 
change could be limited more efficiently with increased focus on and investment in planning and 
implementing  adaptation  actions.  Key  development  needs  include  increasing  awareness  about 
weather and climate risks and adaptation opportunities, clarifying the roles and responsibilities 
 12 
   
 
 
relating to adaptation while ensuring coordination, and developing the monitoring of adaptation 
policy implementation. Furthermore, it is essential to develop sectoral guidance as well as tools and 
guidance to help regional and local parties, in particular, to independently build up their adaptive 
capacities. The recommendations put forward in the interim review were used to revise the Adaptation 
Plan’s actions for the 2020–2022 period. 
   
 13 
   
 
 
3   RENEWABLE ENERGY 
The share of renewable energy in final consumption modelled under different scenarios is shown in 
Figure 3. Final consumption of renewable energy, calculated according to EU rules, is projected to 
increase steadily in the WEM scenario, whereas the modelled low-emission scenarios see it rising to 
about 55% in 2030 and to almost 80% in 2050. In other words, the share growth projected in the low-
emission scenarios surpasses the target set out in the National Energy and Climate Strategy, which 
requires renewable energy to exceed 50% of final energy consumption over the 2020s. Beyond 2030, 
the share of renewable energy will increase exceptionally fast through to 2035 as a result of the carbon 
neutrality target, but will then stabilise by 2050, settling close to a realistically achievable maximum 
level (accounting for nuclear power and energy from waste). The share of biofuels in transport 
modelled under the WEM scenario will account for about 16% of final consumption in 2030, while 
the figure will stand as high as at about 35% under the Continuous Growth scenario and at about 30% 
under the Savings scenario. In 2050, the share of biofuels will stand at 41% under the Continuous 
Growth scenario and at 53% under the Savings scenario. 
The renewable energy source with the highest quantitative growth is wood bioenergy and the 
strongest increase in its use focuses on forest chips and black liquor and other concentrated liquors. 
In addition, bioenergy will be increasingly produced from agricultural by-products, largely as biogas, 
but also from energy crops, especially under the Savings scenario. The low-emission scenarios project 
wind power generation to continue to increase vigorously up until 2035, at which point solar energy 
will catch up with it as an energy source that will further expand the renewables share. Besides these, 
a significant proportion of the increase in renewable energy will come from ambient heating and 
cooling energy generated by heat pumps. Overall, the sharp increase in renewables use will also be 
almost directly reflected in energy self-sufficiency, which will be a few percentage points higher than 
the renewables share. 
 
Figure 3. Modelled shares of renewable energy in final consumption by scenario. 
The modelled share of renewables in primary energy consumption will grow by 50%–64% by 2030 
compared to 2010 levels, as shown in Figure 4. The corresponding increase by 2050 will be 100%–
110%. While the increase is naturally highest under the low-emission scenarios, their absolute 
differences from the WEM scenario are not very significant due to improved energy efficiency. Wind 
 14 
   
 
 
and solar energy will gain a significant role in the supply of renewables under both of the low-
emission scenarios. In 2017, their share was only 3.6%. Even the WEM scenario projects their share 
to more than quadruple, reaching 14%. With regard to wind power, however, it is worth noting that 
its competitiveness development has been exceptionally fast in recent years and it is very difficult to 
estimate the pace of development over the next few decades, which means that the results also involve 
some uncertainty. 
In Figure 4, ‘solid wood fuels’ refers to any wood primary energy, excluding black liquor and other 
concentrated liquors and recycled wood. By 2030, the combined energy use of wood fuels (black 
liquor and other concentrated liquors and solid wood fuels) will grow substantially under the Savings 
scenario, in particular, which is partially attributable to forest industry production volumes pushing 
up the number of by-products (incl. black liquor, bark, sawdust), on the one hand, and to the 
increasing use of forest chips, on the other. While the energy use of wood fuels in 2016 amounted to 
a total of about 360 PJ (100 TWh), it will reach the level of 430–450 PJ (120–126 TWh) in 2030 
under different scenarios. Beyond 2030, wood fuel use will remain at more or less the same level, 
amounting to 440–450 PJ (123–126 TWh) in 2050, regardless of the differences between the scenario 
narratives. Under the Savings scenario, wood fuel use is limited by increasing pulp production in the 
forest industry, as its use of commercial timber will curb the availability of energy wood while driving 
up its price. At the same time, however, demand for advanced bioliquids will create pressure to 
increase the use of wood for energy. Under the Savings scenario, the energy use of black liquor will 
be limited by the use of lignin and hemicellulose for new bioeconomy products instead of energy. 
Furthermore, the use of agricultural by-products is highlighted in the results of the low-emission 
scenarios both in terms of biogas production and the use of straw for energy. All of the scenarios 
expect the use of municipal waste for energy to remain at the current level of about 20 PJ (about 
6 TWh) by 2030 and start declining slightly thereafter as a result of enhanced recycling. 
 
Figure 4. Modelled consumption of renewable primary energy by scenario. 
 15 
   
 
 
4   ENERGY EFFICIENCY 
The  low-emission  scenarios  entail  quite  significant  changes  in  the  structure  of  electricity 
consumption. While electrification is an essential change in all sectors, its impact on growing 
consumption  will  be  largely  offset  by  increasing  efficiency  of  electricity  use.  However,  new 
electricity consumption will also be generated as a result of expanding digitalisation, energy storage 
and carbon-neutral electric fuel processing. 
In the industrial sector, growth in energy industry consumption is the single largest factor impacting 
on changes in electricity consumption. This growth in consumption will mainly come from energy 
storage and conversion losses, carbon-neutral e-fuel production and expanding use of heat pumps for 
municipal district heating and cooling. In process industries, changes involving significant growth in 
electricity consumption include the gradual introduction of direct reduction in manufacturing ore-
based steel, use of hybrid electric furnaces in the mineral industry and, under the Continuous Growth 
scenario, electrolytic hydrogen production in the petrochemical industry. 
As a result of both improved energy efficiency and the limited capacity of competitive generation of 
carbon-neutral district heat, consumption will fall below half the current levels under the low-carbon 
scenarios, driving down the potential for combined municipal heat and power generation. All other 
types of final energy consumption in the heating of buildings will also decline as specific heat 
consumption rates drop both in new buildings and due to extensive energy repairs – by as much as 
about 60% on 2010 levels under the best-case assumptions. Under all of the scenarios, key impacts 
in the industrial sector include electrification in process heat generation and replacement of fossil 
fuels with biofuels. 
In 2010, final energy consumption in Finland amounted to a total of about 300 TWh, of which 
electricity, heat and direct fuel use accounted for 28%, about 13% and 59%, respectively. Based on 
the modelling results, the total amount of final consumption under the WEM scenario will remain 
close to 2015 levels through to 2030 (Figure 5). The results suggest that significant emission 
reductions require considerable electrification in all energy-consuming sectors, as fossil fuels cannot 
be replaced sustainably with bioenergy on a sufficiently large scale. 
Figure 6 shows the trend in total primary energy consumption produced by the TIMES-VTT model. 
The WEM scenario projects total primary energy consumption to peak at around 1,570 PJ (436 TWh) 
from 2030 to 2035 and start declining afterwards. 
Fossil fuel consumption will shrink significantly as early as by 2030 under all of the scenarios, as the 
rising prices of emission allowances and advancements in renewable energy technologies, already 
assumed in the WEM scenario, will undermine the competitiveness of fossil fuels. When compared 
with the WEM scenario, the low-emission scenarios show a sharper drop in the total consumption of 
mineral oil and hard coal, in particular, as early as by 2030, but natural gas will still retain a relatively 
strong foothold due to existing infrastructure and production capacity. As condensing power plants, 
the one or two new nuclear power plants expected to come online between 2020 and 2030 will have 
a substantial impact on the structure and magnitude of the primary energy balance, as will the 
prolonged lifetimes of the existing Loviisa and Olkiluoto plants assumed in the modelling exercise. 
 
 16 
   
 
 
 
Figure 5. Modelled final energy consumption by sector under different scenarios. 
 
Figure 6. Modelled trends in total primary energy supply by scenario. 
 17 
   
 
 
5   SECTOR-SPECIFIC RELATED CONTENT 
5.1 Energy system 
The development of energy production plays a key role in the emissions trajectory under both low-
emission scenarios. In this context, ‘emissions from energy production’ refers to emissions from 
combustion of fuels as part of producing electricity, district heat and industrial process steam. 
Figure 7 shows the trends in carbon dioxide emissions from energy production by source (coal, oil, 
natural gas, peat, and the fossil part of waste fuel used for energy production). In 2015, CO  emissions 
2
from energy production amounted to just over 17 million tonnes, but the modelling results suggest 
that even the WEM scenario will already lead to emissions decreasing to about 10 million tonnes by 
2030, after which they will fall below 5 million tonnes by 2050. Although the price of emission 
allowances is expected to rise, peat will retain its competitiveness in energy production through to 
2030 due to its currently more lenient tax treatment. 
The low-carbon scenarios suggest that, as a result of the carbon neutrality target, energy production 
emissions will decline significantly more steeply after 2030, to the extent that emissions will fall 
below 2 million tonnes in 2040 under both scenarios. Emissions from energy production will settle at 
1.6 million tonnes under the Continuous Growth scenario and at 1.4 million tonnes under the Savings 
scenario. The Savings scenario assumes changes in energy taxes, which will especially affect the use 
of peat. As waste fuel will account for 40% to 50% of the remaining emissions, those from actual 
fossil fuels and peat will amount to less than a million tonnes in total and will be distributed fairly 
evenly between peat, natural gas and oil. By 2050, non-waste fuel emissions will already be more or 
less insignificant. 
 
Figure 7. Development of CO2 emissions from energy production under different scenarios. 
 18 
   
 
 
Figure 8 shows the development of total electricity supply by source according to model calculations. 
The results indicate that, by 2030, total electricity consumption will rise to 93 TWh under the WEM 
scenario and only slightly less under the low-emission scenarios, to 91–92 TWh. By 2030, electricity 
consumption and production will be close to balance due to two new nuclear power plants and rapidly 
growing wind power generation. The Savings scenario projects the need to import at just under 2 TWh 
in 2030, whereas the other scenarios suggest a turn to modest net exports. The impacts of the carbon 
neutrality target on the electricity balance will become more visible beyond 2030, when electrification 
will intensify in all sectors while electricity will also become more widely used for processing so-
called electric fuels (Power-to-X technology). The results indicate that total electricity consumption 
will amount to 105–127 TWh by 2050, showing a growth in the range of 11%–39% on 2030. 
Electricity consumption will reach the highest level under the Continuous Growth scenario, where 
economic growth will remain healthy and electricity will substitute most widely for fuels, as carbon 
capture and storage will not be available. The Savings scenario, in turn, assumes that CCS will be 
available, resulting in more moderate changes in the energy system in other respects. Based on the 
results, by 2050, the need to import electricity will only amount to 3–8 TWh under different scenarios, 
suggesting that security of supply will remain at a relatively healthy level in this respect when 
compared with the current situation, for example. 
 
 
Figure 8. Electricity supply by source under different scenarios. 
The costs of solar power have plummeted over the last ten years and this favourable trend was 
expected to continue, especially under the low-emission scenarios. Based on the results of the model 
calculations, the assumptions lead to a breakthrough in solar power beyond 2030 even in Finland’s 
conditions, to the extent that its production will amount to 25–27 TWh in 2050 under both low-
emission scenarios. Wind power generation will draw near the level of 7 TWh in 2020, while both 
low-emission scenarios project it to more than double to just over 14 TWh by 2030 and move on to 
 19 
   
 
 
exceed 20 TWh by 2035. For 2050, VTT wind power experts have estimated its realistic technical-
economic potential at 28 TWh, of which offshore wind would account for about 40%. These estimates 
have also accounted for limitations on wind power investments, such as those set by the Finnish 
Defence Forces, which means that higher potential might also be possible in the future if barriers to 
investment can be dismantled. The model calculations indicate that wind power generation will reach 
27–33 TWh by 2050 under the low-emission scenarios. 
Due to variations in wind and solar power generation, the electricity system requires substantial 
flexible capacity as their role becomes more prominent. The model results increase flexibilities 
through investments in storage capacity, electricity connection lines and intelligent grids that steer 
demand flexibilities. According to the model results, variable generation will be widely used in areas 
such as Power-to-X applications producing hydrogen or hydrocarbon, which are considerably easier 
to store than electricity. 
5.2 Industry 
The low-emission scenarios assume that the key means to reduce emissions in the industrial sector 
include electrification in process heat generation and replacement of fossil fuels and peat with 
biofuels. Another key assumption is that the process of manufacturing ore-based carbon steel will 
switch to direct reduction after 2030 by replacing coke as a reducing agent with either hydrogen or 
an electrolytic process. Emissions from cement manufacturing can be reduced by hybrid furnaces, 
which allow about half the fuel to be replaced with electricity. Under the Savings scenario, which 
assumes that CCS will be available, it can be applied in cement manufacturing, fuel refining processes 
and, to a limited extent, in pulp production. Under the Continuous Growth scenario, in turn, the 
absence of CCS from the available means will make it more difficult to achieve the emission targets 
in process industries. The calculations therefore included an assumption that blast furnace slag, 
commonly used as an additive in cement manufacturing, could be replaced with recycled materials – 
naturally to a limited extent – thus reducing the pressure to increase fossil cement clinker production. 
Based on the results, GHG emissions in the industrial sector will remain at the level of about 14 Mt 
under both the WEM and Savings scenarios from 2020 to 2030, whereas the Continuous Growth 
scenario projects a substantial decline as early as by 2030 (Figure 9). Between 2030 and 2040, both 
low-emission scenarios expect emissions to fall below five million tonnes, where the largest drop, 6–
8 Mt, will come from fuel combustion emissions. Due to hydrogen technology and CCS applications 
(Savings scenario), a reduction of about 70% on 2010 levels will also be achieved in process 
emissions by 2050, while combustion emissions can almost be pushed down to zero under the 
Continuous Growth scenario, mostly by means of electrification and carbon-neutral renewable and 
synthetic fuels. The distribution of final energy consumption in industry is illustrated below (Figure 
10). 
 20 
   
 
 
 
Figure 9. GHG emission trends in industry by scenario. 
 
Figure 10. Final energy consumption in industry by scenario (‘Other’ covers hydrogen, 
synthetic fuels, etc.). 
 21 
   
 
 
5.3 Transport 
In this context, the transport sector is only analysed in terms of domestic transport, although the 
calculation model also covers international air and maritime transport. GHG emissions in domestic 
transport turned into a downward trend in 2010, but the decline bottomed out in 2016. The reasons 
for the 2016–2017 upswing in emissions include an upturn in fuel consumption in road transport, on 
the one hand, and a clear drop in the share of biofuels, on the other. The variation in the bio-share can 
be attributed to the national blending obligation to increase the share of biofuels, which Finland has 
been implementing in a slightly frontloaded manner. At the same time, however, the VTT LIISA 
2018 calculation model indicates that road transport performance has remained stable or even slightly 
declined, leaving the real reason for the change in consumption partly unclear. 
Based on the results, emissions will increase slightly under the WEM scenario up until 2020 but will 
then take a downward turn (Figure 11). The low-emission scenarios’ trajectories for emissions will 
start to diverge as early as in 2020 as a result of assumed additional measures and will then take a 
steep plunge through to 2035, followed by a slower decline. By 2035, when carbon neutrality will be 
achieved, the modelled GHG emissions in transport will only amount to about 2.5 Mt under the 
Continuous Growth scenario and to about 3 Mt under the Savings scenario. The Continuous Growth 
scenario assumes that even transport emissions will need to be limited to a level very close to zero in 
2050, whereas the Savings scenario considers a reduction to the level of 1.8 Mt sufficient due to CCS 
applications (in other sectors). Under both scenarios, transport emission reductions will mostly be 
achieved by technological means, as the modelling assumed changes in mobility patterns to remain 
fairly modest. 
 
Figure 11. GHG emission trends in domestic transport by scenario. 
One of the key objectives of increasing the use of renewable energy put forward in the National 
Energy and Climate Strategy and the Medium-term Climate Change Policy Plan is to raise the share 
of renewable energy sources in transport. In road transport, the obligation to distribute biofuels is set 
 22 
   
 
 
at 30% in 20306, which will be achieved under both the Savings and Continuous Growth scenarios. 
It would indeed be technically possible to replace fossil petrol and diesel in transport fuels almost 
fully with biofuels or by switching to electric, gas-powered or fuel cell electric vehicles. The scenarios 
considered here assume that the share of ethanol can only rise to 10% of traditional motor petrol, but 
it will nevertheless be complemented with the market entry of second-generation biopetrol, which 
can practically replace fossil petrol in full, just as fossil diesel oil can be substituted with renewable 
diesel. In air transport, it is likewise assumed that biokerosine will enter the market at production 
costs comparable to renewable diesel. 
While it is also possible to expand the use of biogas in vehicles to a substantial extent, its role will 
remain considerably less significant as a whole when compared with other biofuels. Manufacturing 
of synthetic biogas from solid biomass, for example, is not financially profitable under these scenarios 
due to the price and limited availability of sustainable raw material. Its technical-economic production 
potential will therefore not become very significant and, at the same time, it also has other applications 
besides transport that are conducive to reducing emissions. The declining livestock numbers assumed 
in the modelling for agriculture will likewise diminish the potential of biogas derived from manure. 
Based on the results, the share of biofuels under the WEM scenario will account for about 16% of 
final consumption in transport in 2030, while the share will stand as high as at 35% under the 
Continuous Growth scenario and at about 30% under the Savings scenario. In other words, regardless 
of the much faster growth in the market share of electric vehicles, the Continuous Growth scenario 
projects a slightly higher increase in bio-share than the Savings scenario, which is due to their 
differences in terms of the market situation and foreign trade. The Savings scenario, where vehicle 
technology is expected to remain dominated by combustion engines, also projects a clearly slower 
reduction in transport emissions as a result. While the share of biofuels will stand at 41% under the 
Continuous Growth scenario and at 53% under the Savings scenario in 2050, both scenarios also 
envision that synthetic fuels (hydrogen, methanol) will assume an increasingly prominent role, 
especially in heavy-duty transport. Figure 12 shows the modelled distributions of transport fuels 
under different scenarios. 
                                                 
6 Laki biopolttoaineiden käytön edistämisestä liikenteessä annetun lain muuttamisesta [Act amending the Act on 
Promoting the Use of Biofuels in Transport] 419/2019. Available in Finnish at: 
https://www.finlex.fi/fi/laki/alkup/2019/20190419. 
 23 
   
 
 
 
Figure 12. Modelled distribution of transport fuels by scenario. 
5.4 Land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) and agriculture 
The key factors with impacts on emissions and removals in the land use, land-use change and forestry 
(LULUCF) sector include changes in land use, forest growth and harvesting, agriculture and peatland 
management. 
The scenarios for the LULUCF sector were made up of scenarios separately calculated for harvested 
wood products and for each land use category. The calculations produced development scenarios for 
the surface areas of land use categories and land-use change categories; forest development scenarios; 
and production scenarios for harvested wood products to calculate changes in the carbon stocks of 
harvested wood products. Emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector were calculated in six land 
use categories covering Finland’s land area and inland waters. 
Under all of the three scenarios, the LULUCF sector produced a net sink; in other words, its 
greenhouse gas removals exceeded emissions. In Finland, measures focused on forests play a more 
significant role in the LULUCF sector’s balance than other forms of land use. The scenario trends 
took shape up until 2030, after which point their differences became more pronounced. 
The WEM scenario places the LULUCF sector’s net sink in 2050 at 26 Mt CO -eq. Under the 
2
Continuous Growth scenario, the LULUCF sector’s net sink will first remain at the current level and 
then take a swift upswing in 2030, standing as high as at 40 Mt CO -eq in 2050. The favourable 
2
development in terms of the sink will especially result from lower levels of roundwood removals 
 24 
   
 
 
when compared with the WEM scenario. The Savings scenario produced the smallest sink for the 
LULUCF sector, putting its net sink below 20 Mt CO -eq in 2050. The LULUCF sector’s small sink 
2
under the Savings scenario was especially attributable to the assumption of change in forest industry 
production structures and the resulting annual roundwood removals in excess of 90 million cubic 
metres after 2035. Figure 13 shows the LULUCF sector’s net sink trends under different scenarios. 
The following sections provide further details of the assumptions made under the scenarios in terms 
of land-use change, forest growth and harvesting, as well as agricultural developments. 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Net sink trends in the LULUCF sector in different scenarios. 
 
Land-use change under different scenarios 
The scenarios for land-use change are based on trends calculated from previous changes in land use 
and the averages of annual land-use change areas. The land-use change areas were estimated using 
the methodology presented by Haakana et al. (2015)7, taking account of each scenario’s underlying 
assumptions on aspects such as wind farm construction or field afforestation. 
The WEM scenario did not assume any significant changes in measures carried out in the land use 
sector.  With  regard  to  agriculture,  the  Continuous  Growth  and  Savings  scenarios  assume  a 
considerable reduction in national consumption of livestock products (-30% to -50% by 2050). As a 
result, the arable area under active cultivation will shrink due to declining demand for forage area. 
The Continuous Growth scenario, in particular, assumed the arable area to shrink considerably, while 
also expecting that peat field areas, in particular, would be taken out of agricultural production. The 
Savings scenario pointed to similar but milder assumptions. The scenarios considered afforestation 
the primary alternative for agricultural land being freed up. Both scenarios also projected sharp 
reductions in peat production areas. There are relatively small variations in settlement areas between 
different scenarios. The total forest land area changes under the scenarios according to the amounts 
                                                 
7 Haakana, M., Ollila, P., Regina, K., Riihimäki, H. & Tuomainen, T. 2015. Menetelmä maankäytön kehityksen 
ennustamiseen: Pinta-alojen kehitys ja kasvihuonekaasupäästöt vuoteen 2040 [Methodology for forecasting land use 
developments: Developments in surface areas and greenhouse gas emissions by 2040]. Luonnonvara- ja biotalouden 
tutkimus [Natural Resources and Bioeconomy Studies] 51/2015. 
 25 
   
 
 
of areas being afforested and those converted for other uses. Although the scenarios included 
significant afforestation areas, they show little impact on increasing the carbon sink due to the 
relatively short time span involved and the limited size of the afforestation area in proportion to 
Finland’s existing forest land. Table 1 below shows the assumptions made on developments in surface 
areas in different land use categories. 
Table 11. Developments in surface areas under different scenarios. 
WEM 
1,000 ha  2010  2015  2020  2025  2030  2035  2040  2045  2050 
Forest land  21,943  21,888  21,861  21,817  21,771  21,727  21,687  21,653  21,624 
Cropland  2,474  2,486  2,489  2,491  2,491  2,489  2,488  2,488  2,488 
Grassland  238  241  243  244  245  245  246  247  249 
Wetlands  2,989  2,987  2,973  2,956  2,943  2,934  2,927  2,917  2,906 
Settlements  1,432  1,476  1,517  1,574  1,631  1,683  1,731  1,774  1,813 
Other land  1,312  1,311  1,310  1,309  1,308  1,307  1,306  1,305  1,305 
Inland waters  3,455  3,455  3,456  3,457  3,458  3,459  3,460  3,461  3,462 
Total  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843 
 
                 
Continuous Growth 
1,000 ha  2010  2015  2020  2025  2030  2035  2040  2045  2050 
Forest land  21,943  21,888  21,880  21,937  21,994  22,051  22,112  22,186  22,264 
Cropland  2,474  2,486  2,486  2,353  2,219  2,085  1,952  1,814  1,676 
Grassland  238  241  243  277  310  343  377  401  425 
Wetlands  2,990  2,986  2,952  2,937  2,923  2,912  2,902  2,891  2,881 
Settlements  1,432  1,476  1,517  1,574  1,632  1,686  1,736  1,786  1,832 
Other land  1,312  1,311  1,310  1,309  1,308  1,307  1,306  1,305  1,304 
Inland waters  3,455  3,455  3,456  3,457  3,458  3,459  3,460  3,461  3,462 
Total  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843 
 
                 
Savings 
1,000 ha  2010  2015  2020  2025  2030  2035  2040  2045  2050 
Forest land  21,943  21,888  21,864  21,885  21,904  21,930  21,958  21,985  22,017 
Cropland  2,474  2,486  2,486  2,408  2,331  2,251  2,171  2,092  2,013 
Grassland  238  241  243  263  282  302  322  342  362 
Wetlands  2,990  2,986  2,967  2,949  2,932  2,915  2,899  2,890  2,881 
Settlements  1,432  1,476  1,517  1,573  1,628  1,681  1,727  1,769  1,805 
Other land  1,312  1,311  1,310  1,309  1,308  1,307  1,306  1,305  1,305 
Inland waters  3,455  3,455  3,456  3,457  3,458  3,459  3,460  3,461  3,462 
Total  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843  33,843 
 
 
Trends in forest growth, forest harvesting and forest land carbon sink levels under the scenarios 
The WEM scenario assumes that annual forest growth in forest and scrubland will amount to about 
116 million m3 at 2050 levels. When compared with the WEM scenario, the annual levels of forest 
growth would be slightly lower under the Savings scenario, standing at 113 million m3, and slightly 
higher under the Continuous Growth scenario, standing at 117 million m3. The most recently 
measured annual growing stock increment amounts to 108 million cubic metres. 
 26 
   
 
 
The scenarios examine forest harvesting in terms of roundwood removals. As a concept, ‘roundwood’ 
covers both commercial timber for use by the forest industry and wood used for energy purposes. The 
WEM scenario assumes that the annual roundwood removal will amount to 72 million cubic metres 
up until 2024 and would then rise to about 80 million cubic metres. Between 2025 and 2054, annual 
roundwood removals are expected to remain stable at 80–81 million cubic metres. The WEM 
scenario’s assumptions on both the forest industry production volumes and roundwood removal 
trends are in line with the currently valid National Forest Strategy and National Energy and Climate 
Strategy. The other two scenarios considered here made assumptions on changes in forest industry 
production structures that also had a bearing on roundwood removals. 
The WEM scenario’s key input assumptions for forest industry production by 2050 are that board 
production will decline slightly in Finland, whereas net exports of pulp and sawn timber will increase 
slightly. These assumptions were based on the basic estimate prepared by Pöyry PLC in 2016. 
All three scenarios assumed that the current downward trend in paper products would continue. 
Conversely, the assumption on board products was that global demand and, consequently, domestic 
production would grow over the next few decades, but the growth trend would decelerate starting 
from 2030. 
The Continuous Growth scenario made the assumption that forest industry production volumes would 
begin to decline most distinctly starting from 2030. The highest production volumes were projected 
in the Savings scenario, which assumes that both the chemical and mechanical forest industry will 
gradually switch to manufacturing new, higher value-added products. In pulp production, this means 
a shift to new fibre products and manufacturing biochemical products from materials such as lignin 
and hemicellulose fractions of residual lyes, currently used primarily for energy purposes. As for the 
mechanical forest industry, in turn, it involves manufacturing wood products that are considerably 
more advanced than classic sawn timber, which can be seen in a downward turn in classic sawn timber 
production volumes after 2030 and in a corresponding surge in the volumes of processed sawn timber. 
Based on these assumptions on forest industry production, the Continuous Growth and Savings 
scenarios also differ from the WEM scenario in terms of roundwood removals. The Continuous 
Growth scenario projects annual roundwood removals to stand at 81.8 million m3 for the 2025–2034 
period, followed by a slight decline just below 80 million m3 starting from 2035. The Savings 
scenario assumes clearly higher total roundwood removals for the 2035–2054 period than the other 
scenarios, amounting to about 92 million cubic metres annually. Instead of any material change in 
the proportion of imported wood, the scenarios assumed that the forest industry’s demand for raw 
material would focus on domestic harvesting operations. 
The differences between the scenarios in terms of roundwood removals will only become visible over 
the last two decades (2035–2054). The total growing stock volume on forest and scrubland will 
continue to develop steadily from 2015 to 2055. The Continuous Growth and WEM scenarios arrived 
at a total volume of over 3.2 billion m3 for 2055, whereas the Savings scenario put the figure at just 
under 2.9 billion m3. As the most recently measured volume of growing stock is 2.5 billion cubic 
metres, all of the scenarios project a growth in the total volume compared to current levels. 
Calculated on the basis of annual roundwood removals, the net carbon sink of forest land will vary 
between 25 and 28 Mt CO -equivalents over the 2030–2040 period under the WEM scenario and will 
2
reach the level of 34.4 Mt CO -equivalents by 2050. When compared with the WEM scenario, the 
2
2050 forest carbon sink will be slightly higher under the Continuous Growth scenario because it 
assumes a lower level of roundwood removals. Conversely, the forest net sink projected in the 
 27 
   
 
 
Savings scenario will fall considerably below that of the WEM and Continuous Growth scenarios due 
to the fact that the Savings scenario expects roundwood removals to reach a clearly higher level than 
the other two scenarios. The scenarios place the turning point around 2030. 
The scenarios analysed the impact of harvested wood products using the greenhouse gas inventory 
method. Increasing the amount of harvested timber will decrease forest carbon sinks (Savings) and, 
vice versa, reducing the amount of harvested timber under a scenario will increase sinks (Continuous 
Growth). Harvested wood products will not fully compensate for decreasing sinks, even if production 
focused on durable products (Savings). 
It should be borne in mind that the scenario forecasts for forest developments were based on the forest 
industry’s projected wood consumption and the estimates for roundwood removals, as well as on 
calculations performed using the MELA software on the basis of these assumptions. The level of 
harvesting chosen under the scenarios has a bearing on the increment of growing stock and its total 
volume developments and, consequently, on the amount of carbon sequestered in trees. The model 
assumptions and the parameters applied have a significant effect on the end results, especially in the 
long run, due to the dynamic nature of forest growth. Calculation methods are also developing 
constantly and new research may change the results significantly. 
Scenarios for the agricultural sector 
The WEM scenario for the agricultural sector forecasts that domestic demand for all food products 
will increase by about 5% by 2030, assuming that per-capita food consumption will remain at 2018 
levels over the 2019–2050 period. An exception is poultry consumption, where the robust growth that 
has continued since the turn of the millennium is expected to stagnate. 
The rapid increase in energy prices forecast for the 2020s will especially raise agricultural fuel prices 
(by 23% from 2018 to 2028) and, to a lesser extent, fertiliser prices (by 13% over the same period). 
The WEM scenario assumes that product prices will remain unchanged after 2028. The real prices of 
agricultural products, i.e. product price developments relative to input prices, will remain more or 
less the same, especially in plant products. Real prices will rise slightly in some dairy products, such 
as milk powder and cheese, but the dairy sector as a whole will also see very moderate price 
developments. 
The WEM scenario assumes that agricultural policy will be the same as during the 2014–2020 period. 
No potential reductions in EU aid have been taken into account beyond 2020. Any minor decrease in 
area-based subsidies would have a very limited impact on agricultural production volumes. 
Productivity will continue to grow in the agricultural sector, particularly in dairy farming, which will 
see a large-scale shift from units with a single milking robot to those with two or more robots over 
the 2020s and 2030s. This shift is already underway and will increase the efficiency of labour used 
in production. Productivity will also continue to grow in other areas of livestock production, mostly 
in terms of labour productivity, but to a lesser extent in crop production, where yields are expected 
to remain unchanged. However, the increase in fertiliser prices by several percentage points in the 
early 2020s will reduce yields by one to three per cent for different plants. 
The WEM scenario projects the poor productivity of agriculture to continue from the 2014–2018 
baseline. Due to structural developments, agricultural production will remain more or less unchanged, 
with the exception of a slight decline in beef and cereal production. In dairy production, structural 
and other productivity developments will maintain output at previous levels through to 2050, whereas 
 28 
   
 
 
beef production, which fell short of domestic demand by over 20% in 2018, is highly likely to drop 
to at least 30% below domestic consumption by 2050. The profitability of suckler beef production is 
not good enough to enable any large-scale expansion. 
The WEM scenario expects the arable area under active cultivation to shrink by about 200,000 
hectares during the 2020s, which is due to the low baseline of profitability in cereal cultivation, energy 
and fertiliser price increases during the 2020s and the resulting concentration of production on 
croplands with higher than average yields. As a whole, despite agricultural aid, the relative proportion 
of fields with lower than average yields being taken out of cultivation will be highest in the eastern 
and northern parts of Finland, but this will also take place in other parts of the country. 
The WEM scenario projects the total sum of emissions in the agricultural sector to stand at 6.45 Mt 
CO -eq in 2050, or one per cent below 2015 levels, mostly due to the decreasing number of animals. 
2
The Savings and Continuous Growth scenarios for agriculture assumed that the consumption of meat 
and dairy products would decline by 30% to 50% by 2050. Consumption of livestock products would 
be replaced with plant protein and fish products. A further assumption was that EU price levels would 
not rise while agricultural aid would see some decline. The Continuous Growth and Savings scenarios 
expect the arable area under active cultivation to shrink considerably due to declining demand for 
forage area, which will lead to substantial reductions in GHG emissions. However, this requires the 
incentives for the necessary change in land use to be acceptable, substantial and long-term from the 
perspective of land owners and farmers. The scenarios also assume that large livestock farms will 
channel increasing amounts of manure into biogas production. 
The Savings scenario projects 2050 emissions to stand at 4.36 Mt CO -eq, or 33% below 2015 levels, 
2
whereas the figure for the Continuous Growth scenario is 3.84 Mt CO -eq, or 41% below 2015 levels. 
2
Under the Continuous Growth and Savings scenarios, emission reductions come from: (1) decreasing 
numbers of animals; (2) taking peat fields out of production; (3) declining use of synthetic fertilisers; 
and (4) declining demand for arable land and steering demand towards reducing GHG emissions, 
especially on peat fields (LULUCF). 
Impacts of agricultural changes on land use 
The WEM scenario expects that more than 200,000 ha of arable land will be freed up from agricultural 
production by 2050. Of this, over 100,000 ha would already be released during the 2020s, provided 
that the increase in the prices of production inputs will manifest and will not be offset by a higher 
increase in agricultural product prices. Low profitability and cost pressures will lead to streamlining: 
low-yield arable land will be taken out of production but will remain as agricultural land with current 
agricultural policy due to decoupled area payments for eligible agricultural land irrespective of 
whether it is used for production or not. 
The Continuous Growth and Savings scenarios project the croplands to shrink by 470,000 to 815,000 
hectares by 2050. As a result of the assumptions made under the Savings and Continuous Growth 
scenarios, agricultural changes will especially have an impact on peatland emissions classified under 
the LULUCF sector’s ‘cropland’ emissions, which would decline by 4–5 Mt CO -eq over a period 
2
from 2015 to 2050. 
 29 
   
 
 
Points to consider in the change 
The climate action relating to agricultural land-use change may have a negative impact on agricultural 
biodiversity. Unproductive fields and open agricultural landscapes play an essential role in terms of 
agricultural biodiversity and threatened species. There is little open land in Finland. Fields only 
account for about 7% of the country’s total area. 
Measures such as afforestation and rewetting of open areas will reduce the important area for 
agricultural biodiversity. Overgrowth is and will continue to be the main threat for almost all 
threatened habitats dependent on agriculture. In addition to traditional rural biotopes, the types of 
current and former fields of most importance for biodiversity are slightly nutrient-poor, extensively 
used old perennial grass areas. 
Major changes in agriculture and arable land will have broad impacts on society and these impacts 
will be very unevenly distributed between different population groups and regions. Major changes in 
agricultural production and arable land use will involve significant localised impacts on the regional 
economy and employment, especially in areas where agriculture is based on peatland use. 
One of the main pillars of food security is the continuity of food supply, which refers to security of 
food availability at all times. Indeed, domestic agriculture is, first and foremost, linked to food 
security precisely from the perspective of security of supply. Maintaining food security at levels that 
correspond  to  domestic  demand  and  its  change  requires  constant  investments  in  agricultural 
restructuring, productivity, skills, and the competitiveness of the entire domestic food chain. This 
means, among other things, that if the arable area in use shrinks and is steered towards achieving 
climate and various environmental objectives, it will be all the more important to ensure the soil 
condition of the remaining arable land used for production. 
It is highly likely that weather extremes and market price fluctuations are intensifying rather than 
declining. At the same time as global food demand is growing, particularly in terms of protein-rich 
products, challenges of global and European food security are increasing. This must also be borne in 
mind when planning measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. 
Links to agricultural and rural development policies 
The  choice  of  instruments  for  steering  the  agricultural  sector  is  influenced  by  climate  policy 
objectives and the cost-efficiency and effectiveness of the measures to be chosen, as well as many 
other factors. The instruments need to be compatible with EU provisions. Agriculture is regulated at 
the EU level more broadly than any other sector. No measures may conflict with the EU Common 
Agricultural Policy (CAP) and any national support measures should comply with the EU state aid 
rules. Instruments should be chosen with due consideration for their impact on the objectives of other 
policy sectors and the consistency of objectives. While the impacts of agriculture on water bodies and 
nutrient cycles are key environmental impacts, its effects must also be assessed in terms such as 
biodiversity. 
Maintaining the profitability and competitiveness of food production must be taken into account to 
ensure self-sufficiency. The applicability, reasonableness and equitability of the measures across the 
country form part of their legitimacy. Steering instruments must also be chosen with due account of 
the need to streamline administrative procedures. 
The EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) contributes to the arable area under cultivation, the 
choice of crops to be grown and the number of animals. Climate change mitigation and adaptation 
 30 
   
 
 
are increasingly shaping the EU Common Agricultural Policy. The need for more efficient and 
effective climate and environmental actions has intensified as the EU Common Agricultural Policy 
is being reformed. 
The Rural Development Programme for Mainland Finland 2014–2020 includes an agri-environment 
payment, which is a key instrument to promote sustainable development in agriculture. The measures 
of the Rural Development Programme to reduce GHG emissions include: balanced use of nutrients; 
plant cover on fields in winter; catch crops; incorporation of slurry into fields; recycling of nutrients 
and organic matter; and environmental grasslands. The investment support of the Rural Development 
Programme can be granted for setting up controlled subsurface drainage as well as renewable energy 
and manure storage and handling solutions. 
There is a currently ongoing CAP27 reform. Its climate and environmental objectives include 
contributing to climate change mitigation and adaptation, as well as sustainable energy production 
and use. The reform also aims to foster sustainable development and efficient management of natural 
resources  such  as  water,  soil  and  air.  Further  objectives  include  contributing  to  biodiversity 
protection, enhancing ecosystem services and preserving habitats and landscapes. As for financing, 
the CAP27 reform target is to channel 40% of CAP measures into climate action and it includes an 
obligation to allocate 30% of rural development funds to environmental and climate measures. 
5.5 Waste sector 
Greenhouse gas emissions from waste management have historically played a significant role, in 
particular due to methane emissions from landfilling, but the level of emissions has been decreasing 
sharply since the turn of the millennium as a result of advancements in waste sorting and recycling. 
Waste management emissions are generated as part of landfilling, composting, anaerobic digestion 
and wastewater treatment. Although the energy use of waste is part of waste management, its 
emissions are not included in the sector’s statistics. 
Inventories indicate that the total emissions from waste management decreased by 50% over a period 
from 2000 to 2017, at the same time as the amount of landfilled municipal waste dropped from 
1.58 million tonnes to 0.03 million tonnes. Correspondingly, the material and energy recovery of 
waste has increased significantly. As the amount of landfilled waste has shrunk by 98%, methane 
emissions from solid waste will decline in the future as a result of waste decomposition. The WEM 
scenario’s results also suggest that landfill gas recovery will be somewhat enhanced in old fills, where 
gas may still escape into the air even in quite large quantities. In addition, waste management 
emissions may also be reduced to some extent by improving biological waste and wastewater 
treatment processes, but additional measures have quite limited impacts on the overall greenhouse 
gas balance. 
The system model included a few additional technical measures to reduce emissions from wastewater 
treatment, roughly described in generic terms, and the low-emission scenarios also assumed methane 
emissions from biological treatment of solid waste to decline by 15%. As a combined effect of these, 
the level of emissions from waste treatment over the 2035–2050 period was about 0.1 Mt CO -eq 
2
lower under the low-emission scenarios than under the WEM scenario. 
 
 31 
   
 
 
 
Figure 14. GHG emissions from waste management by scenario. 
 
   
 32 
   
 
 
6   FINANCING 
6.1 Estimates of investment needed 
The investments required to achieve the climate neutrality objective particularly concern industry. 
The investment survey 1/2020 published by the Confederation of Finnish Industries (EK) suggests 
that industries expect to invest a total of about EUR 10.2 billion in 2020. The investments are divided 
as follows: about EUR 4.5 billion in fixed assets by manufacturing industries; about EUR 2.8 billion 
by energy industries; and about EUR 2.9 billion in R&D (intangible investments) in total by the entire 
industrial sector. 
According to the EK investment surveys, the annual level of industrial investment varied between 
eight and ten billion euros over a period from 2009 to 2018. The annual levels of investment varied 
between EUR 3 and 5 billion in manufacturing industries and between EUR 1.5 and 3 billion in 
energy industries, while R&D investments ranged between EUR 2.5 and 4 billion. Should the annual 
level of investment remain at about EUR 10 billion, this would mean total industrial investments to 
the tune of EUR 300 billion from 2020 to 2050, more than EUR 200 billion of which would consist 
of fixed investments in industries and the energy system. However, reduction of GHG emissions is 
likely to call for additional investments. Some Finnish industrial players have even estimated that 
achievement of climate objectives would double the level of investment needed in their own industry. 
Based on information obtained from surveys and other sources, it is possible to estimate that the total 
investments required to achieve the climate objectives in Finnish industries will exceed EUR 100 
billion  between  2020  and  2050.  Bringing  energy  system  emissions  close  to  zero  will  require 
approximately at least EUR 20 million in investments in clean energy production between 2020 and 
2050. In addition, substantial investment will be needed in energy grids and systems as well as in 
renewable processes within energy-intensive industries. The industrial sector’s climate solutions will 
be closely linked to energy solutions; by way of example, hydrogen  production for industrial 
processes may also have a considerable impact on energy distribution and production investments. 
Renovations 
According to Finland’s principles, improvements in energy efficiency will be integrated into regular 
repairs, allowing material- and energy-efficient implementation. Estimated on the basis of the 2018 
cost-optimal  levels  of  minimum  energy  performance  requirements  applicable  to  renovations, 
implementing Finland’s long-term renovation strategy will cost a total of EUR 24 billion over 30 
years, equating to EUR 800 million per year. VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland estimates 
that this will correspond to a total of 12,000 person-years within manufacturing industries, services 
and  worksites.  According  to  the  2018  estimate  of  the  Confederation  of  Finnish  Construction 
Industries, the costs account for six per cent of the annual volume of building renovations, which 
totals EUR 13 billion. 
Phasing out the use of peat for energy 
On 14 January 2020, the European Commission adopted legislative proposals on the Just Transition 
Mechanism. One part of the mechanism is the Just Transition Fund (JTF) amounting to EUR 7.5 
billion, which would be used to support all Member States. Finland’s allocation of the JTF amounts 
to EUR 165 million, accounting for about 2.2% of the total JTF resources. However, tapping into the 
funding  requires  each  Member  State  to  transfer  their  resources  from  the  European  Regional 
Development Fund (ERDF) and the European Social Fund Plus (ESF+) equivalent to at least 1.5 
 33 
   
 
 
times the JTF allocation and corresponding national co-financing set according to the relevant 
category of region. Accordingly, Finland would have access to (at least) about EUR 750 million to 
support  a  just  transition  over  the  forthcoming  2021–2027  programming  period.  The  resource 
allocation method would be based on five weighted criteria, among which production of peat is 
especially relevant to Finland. 
According to the proposed Regulation, the Just Transition Fund will be established “to provide 
support to territories facing serious socio-economic challenges deriving from the transition process 
towards a climate-neutral economy of the Union by 2050”. The Member States should identify the 
territories and activities that are the most impacted by the transition towards a climate-neutral 
economy and where support from the Just Transition Fund will be concentrated. For Finland, the 
Commission proposes that support based on peat production be concentrated on the NUTS2 region 
of Northern and Eastern Finland, as it accounts for the largest proportion of the total peat production 
volume among Finland’s NUTS2 regions. The Commission further considers that this region is less 
equipped to overcome the socio-economic problems caused by declining peat production than other 
major regions. 
In the context of the Commission’s proposal, Finland has focused attention on the exclusion of three 
significant peat production regions – South Ostrobothnia, Central Finland and Satakunta – from the 
proposed target territory. Even if the allocation of resources were based on peat production, the JTF 
measures are not required to concentrate exclusively on alleviating the effects of phasing out the use 
of peat for energy; rather, just transition plans may also define other measures relating to the effects 
of the climate transition. The employment effects of peat production are estimated at about 2,300 
person-years and, with multiplier effects included, at about 4,200 person-years. These are especially 
focused on South and North Ostrobothnia. As the details of phasing out the energy use of peat are not 
currently known, the specific allocation of JTF resources will only be determined at a later date. 
Specific aspects to consider include whether some energy use of peat will be replaced with other uses 
and how this would be allocated in regional terms. 
6.2 Policies and measures for related research, development and innovation 
Implementing measures towards the climate objectives in industry and energy supply  requires 
significant investments in research, development and demonstration of climate-friendly solutions. In 
total, the industrial sector will probably invest at least about EUR 100 billion in R&D over the 2020–
2050 period, with a significant proportion focusing on R&D into climate solutions. If these accounted 
for 35%, for example, equating to the target defined in Horizon Europe preparations, investments in 
R&D into climate solutions would amount to at least about EUR 35 billion over the 2020–2050 
period. 
Research, development and innovation policy actions and measures will be implemented so as to 
enable the development of a wide range of climate solutions to meet the needs of industry and energy 
supply by means such as sectoral integration and digitalisation. The measures will take account of the 
needs to find new solutions for sectors facing challenges with putting low-carbon technologies into 
use.  These  include  certain  energy-intensive  industrial  processes,  transport  and  development  of 
flexible energy systems. Examples of technological solutions may include digital energy systems, 
batteries and energy storage, as well as Power-to-X solutions. 
   
 34 
   
 
 
7   IMPACT ASSESSMENT OF THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC ASPECTS 
7.1 Environmental impact assessments 
Similar to the previous PITKO project, the key environmental impacts that can be identified under 
the updated scenarios include impacts on climate change, biodiversity, water bodies, non-renewable 
natural resources, and human health, comfort and wellbeing. As a general rule, if realised, the 
scenarios considered in this long-term strategy can be assessed to have positive environmental 
impacts, as the scenario narratives are premised on the assumption that achieving the below two-
degree climate goal will succeed globally. This will likely make significant positive contributions to 
a wide variety of environmental impacts when compared with the WEM scenario, where the climate 
goal will not be achieved. However, the scenarios also involve some climate impacts that were not 
assessed in the context of this long-term strategy. 
The updated scenarios diverge in terms of the trends in emissions and removals in different sectors. 
The most significant difference is in forest sinks, which are clearly smaller under the Savings scenario 
when compared with the Continuous Growth scenario due to the higher levels of forest harvesting. 
In addition to greenhouse gases, climate impacts are caused by factors such as changes in the Earth’s 
surface reflectivity (albedo), black carbon emissions and aerosol emissions from forests. Some of 
these impacts have global warming potential, whereas others have global cooling potential and many 
factors involve significant insecurities. The trend or scale of these impacts under the scenarios 
considered were not assessed in this context. 
The scenarios considered expect that air quality will improve as transport performance declines, 
electric transport increases and small-scale combustion of wood decreases with wider deployment of 
alternative heating solutions and improved energy efficiency. The growing prevalence of walking, 
cycling and vegetarian diets and improved pleasantness of environments will also bring about health 
benefits. At the same time, however, the increasing density of urban structures will lead to higher 
numbers of people exposed to air pollution while also creating challenges for preserving green areas. 
The climate change mitigation measures required under the scenarios considered may also involve 
significant  impacts  on  people’s  living  conditions,  including  those  that  will  highlight  income 
disparities. 
7.2 National economic impact assessments 
In the modelling exercise performed using the FINAGE model, the scenarios aim to describe the 
development of the national economy in the light of different technological choices and trajectories 
and  emission  reduction  targets.  The  differences  between  the  scenarios  in  terms  of  economic 
development stem from divergent technologies and production in the energy, industrial and transport 
sectors. In other sectors of the economy, their differences will ultimately remain relatively limited. 
The Continuous Growth scenario highlights growth in exports and manufacturing based on domestic 
resources. The scenario projects net exports to have a very pronounced impact on growth, which can 
indeed be easily called ‘export-driven’. Growth will be distributed more evenly among different 
industries than under the WEM scenario and, consequently, the value of machinery and equipment 
production, for example, will increase by a factor of almost 2.5. When compared with the WEM 
scenario, growth will also be more capital- and labour-intensive – in other words, the impact of capital 
and labour input on growth will be clearly larger. The growth impact stemming from technological 
advancements will nevertheless be significant. After all, growth will lead to new technology being 
 35 
   
 
 
put into use, while sectors such as transport will electrify very rapidly. General government revenue 
from emissions trading and indirect taxes will increase, unlike under the other scenarios. The focus 
of taxation will shift more clearly towards taxing consumption when compared with the other 
scenarios. 
The Savings scenario underlines domestic measures to reduce emissions, ranging from energy savings 
to biofuels. However, this scenario also makes room for exports, although growth in the output of 
several export industries will remain slower than under the Continuous Growth scenario. Trends in 
transport are similar to the WEM scenario. Consumption taxes will also increase almost in step with 
the WEM scenario. However, economic growth will fall slightly short of the level projected in the 
Continuous Growth scenario. Increases in environmentally-related indirect taxation, used as an 
instrument of steering household behaviour based on environmental considerations, will remain at a 
lower level when compared with the previous scenarios, as the proportion of CO  taxation will 
2
decrease due to growth in the use of domestic biofuels. 
The Continuous Growth and Savings scenarios aim to describe economic development in the light of 
different technological choices and trajectories and emission reduction targets. As the scenarios differ 
in all of these respects (first and foremost in terms of reducing emissions), they are not unambiguously 
comparable to the extent that it would be possible to shift from one scenario to the other by making 
different choices. Rather, the scenarios describe the outcomes to which the choices and objectives 
decided in the very near future could lead. 
The differences between the scenarios stem from divergent technologies and production. In other 
sectors of the economy, their differences will ultimately remain relatively limited. In other words, 
while the scenarios may involve quite different choices in terms of technologies and emission 
reductions, the choices will spread from the key sectors to other sectors of the economy to a moderate 
extent and none of the scenarios entails endangering the prerequisites of economic growth and the 
welfare state, as shown in Figures 15 and 16. Nevertheless, the focus of growth will be slightly 
different under different scenarios. Technological advancements – growth in total factor productivity 
– will play a key role in the future as well. However, deploying new technologies will require 
increasing investments – as energy will be replaced with capital – and this will manifest as a higher 
growth impact of capital when compared with the WEM scenario. More stringent emission targets, 
in turn, will be reflected in quite a pronounced increase in the contribution of economic steering – i.e. 
indirect taxes – on growth. 
 
 36 
   
 
 
 
Figure 15. Impact of economic demand items on growth in domestic product in 2019–2035, %. 
 
 
Figure 16. Impact of economic demand items on growth in domestic product in 2019–2050, %. 
 
 37 
   
 
 
The differences between the scenarios in terms of economic wellbeing can be described by means of 
a decomposition of aggregate demand growth, presented for 2035 and 2050 in Figures 17 and 18, 
respectively. Economic wellbeing will grow even with the transition to a low-carbon society. When 
analysed through the lens of growth in consumption, the technology-driven differences between the 
scenarios will also become clearer because of their quite different focus and timing for deployment 
of new technologies. 
In conclusion, it is fair to say that, based on the modelling, economic wellbeing will grow even with 
the transition to a low-carbon or carbon-neutral society. When approached through both supply and 
demand, however, it becomes clear that an early pursuit of carbon neutrality will entail additional 
costs when compared with the previous timetable for reducing emissions. Nevertheless, it is assessed 
that this will neither jeopardise household wellbeing nor the public sector’s fiscal position and future 
provision of welfare services. 
 
 
Figure 17. Impact of economic supply items on growth in domestic product in 2019–2035, %. 
 
 38 
   
 
 
 
Figure 18. Impact of economic supply items on growth in domestic product in 2019–2050, %. 
 
Figures 19 and 20 describe the impact of the carbon neutrality target on economic energy and 
emissions intensity under the WEM scenario and in the low-emission scenarios. Emissions intensity, 
in  particular,  has  declined  significantly  since  the  turn  of  the millennium.  However,  it  is  also 
considered that energy intensity should continue to fall to half the current levels, while emissions 
intensity should correspondingly drop to a level close to zero by 2050. Energy intensity will also 
decline under the WEM scenario, which means that energy efficiency will improve even with existing 
measures. 
 
 39 
   
 
 
 
Figure 19. Trends in economic energy intensity under the WEM scenario and in the 
low-emission scenarios. 
 
 
Figure 20. Trends in economic emissions intensity. Emissions include GHG 
emissions under the Kyoto Protocol but exclude land use emissions and removals 
(i.e. the LULUCF sector). 
 
ANNEXES 
1.  Summary of the results of the public consultation organised on Finland’s long-term strategy 
2.  Balance between GHG emissions and removals under different scenarios 
3.  Descriptions of scenario modelling processes 
 Annex 1  1 
 
 
Summary of the results of the public consultation organised on 
Finland’s long-term strategy 
 
Question 1: 
The 2050 greenhouse gas emission reduction target (excl. the land use sector) is set at 87.5% under 
the Continuous Growth scenario and at 90% under the Savings scenario compared to 1990 levels. 
Both of the low-emission scenarios also achieve the 2035 carbon neutrality target. Is the 2050 target 
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions ambitious enough and what should Finland’s greenhouse gas 
emission reduction target be for 2050? 
Summary of responses: 
There were varying responses about the level of ambition of the emission reduction target. Some 
thought that it would be sufficiently ambitious if carbon neutrality were to be achieved by 2035, 
whereas others felt that it was still too soon to judge whether the level of ambition was adequate. The 
level of ambition of the 2050 target, in particular, was considered to be too low, especially in terms 
of what level of emission reductions would be fair for Finland. 
There were also comments arguing that too stringent emission reduction targets would lead to loss of 
cost-efficiency and additional economic costs and that emission reductions should be planned so as 
not to stop at 2050. Respondents also mentioned carbon negativity and the absence of measures to 
achieve climate neutrality on time. More important than precise numerical targets was the trend. 
Question 2: 
In your opinion, have the long-term strategy scenarios successfully identified realistic emission 
reductions, or has something been overlooked? 
Summary of responses: 
The role of consumption and emissions generated elsewhere from Finnish consumption should be 
taken into account in emission reductions and  various steering instruments  should be used to 
encourage more responsible consumption patterns. Aspects that seem to have been overlooked 
include the possibility of using steering instruments to encourage emission reductions in the land use 
sector; the full potential of electrification in energy production; the opportunities provided by the 
circular economy, material efficiency and digitalisation; as well as the potential of sustainable 
mobility modes. 
All sectors of society should pitch in with the joint emission reduction effort. The Finnish energy 
sector is already well advanced and the sector has a clear roadmap in place to reduce emissions on 
the journey towards carbon neutrality. The greatest emission reduction challenges can indeed be 
found outside the energy sector, which is why, moving forward, climate action should especially 
focus on reducing emissions from industrial processes, as well as on urban planning, transport and 
agricultural policy. Different technologies must be applied simultaneously, without excluding any 
economically viable option. It is necessary to look more extensively into areas such as emission 
reduction opportunities in industrial waste heat recovery. Climate-sustainable business activities 
ought to be supported more effectively, making sustainable entrepreneurship more attractive than 
engaging in business that is detrimental to the climate. Change in emission reductions may be faster 
than suggested, but this requires substantial investments in energy production infrastructure and runs 
the risk of a significant decline in energy efficiency. 
 Annex 1  2 
 
 
Climate labelling should also be mandatory for imports in all product categories. The potential for 
increasing bioenergy use should not be overestimated. Moving forward, the use of biomass should be 
directed towards applications capable of creating more added value than energy use (including liquid 
fuels). Resource-efficient biomass use should therefore be adopted as a key criterion for granting 
investment support, for example. 
Respondents also mentioned topics such as the mandatory nature of climate labels in all product 
categories; switching to a plant-based diet; promoting wood construction; deployment of small 
modular reactor (SMR) plants; and the potential of geothermal energy. 
Question 3: 
The land use sector will remain a net sink under all of the scenarios; in other words, the sector’s 
greenhouse gas removals exceed emissions, increasing its carbon stocks. What measures do you 
consider the most important in the long term to strengthen carbon sinks and stocks and to reduce 
emissions in the land use sector (land use, land-use change and forestry) in Finland? 
Summary of responses: 
The key point is to keep forests healthy and in good condition by means of active forest management. 
In the forest sector, it makes no sense to consider solutions over a period of less than 50 years. 
Especially  with  forestry  carbon  sinks,  we  should  reach  a situation  where sinks  would  not  be 
completely dependent on demand for wood and variations in harvesting levels. Since the forest 
growth rate is an important variable in terms of the GHG balance, any policy measures relevant to 
growth (ensuring and increasing growth by means such as ash fertilisation) are also important. 
The  means  suggested  by  respondents  also  included  the following:  afforestation  of  scrublands; 
abandoning the use of peat fields and peatland clearance in agriculture; intensifying the capacity of 
croplands as carbon sinks; establishing new nature conservation areas; and keeping to smaller forest 
harvesting quotas, favouring the principle of continuous growth, thus also improving biodiversity 
protection. In addition, the harvesting cycle of production forests should be extended. The safest way 
to sequester carbon is to protect and restore forests and mires. 
The land use sector requires stronger steering instruments to cut down on forest clearance. Emissions 
could be reduced by curtailing deforestation with regard to both clearance of fields and construction 
activity – the steering instruments suggested for this purpose include fees payable for land-use change 
– or by developing the use of forests so as to maximise climate benefits, i.e. by directing the structure 
of production towards wood products with stronger emission-reducing effects. 
Furthermore, it is advisable to curb deforestation due to construction and agriculture and to increase 
forest cover by afforestation where it will make a difference. Any agricultural and forestry subsidies 
should  be  revised  to  be  based  on  environmentally-related  criteria,  which  would  also  cover 
encouraging land owners to contribute to protecting and strengthening carbon stocks and sinks. 
It is imperative to keep the importance of a socially just/fair transition in mind. As Finland is moving 
its economy away from the use of fossil fuels, such as peat, it is necessary to ensure that the measures 
involved are just and respectful of everyone’s fundamental and human rights. 
Question 4: 
Do you have any other comments concerning the long-term strategy? 
 Annex 1  3 
 
 
Summary of responses: 
The strategy should be based on creating incentives for a just climate change by all possible means. 
The strategy should not be isolated from measures being carried out in other sectors or administrative 
branches. The focus should be on what to support, not on what to ban or restrict. The use of 
agricultural and industrial subsidies should be supervised and directed towards uses where each 
specific solution would be of most benefit in concrete terms. Strategy implementation should also be 
considered in a broader context beyond our own country, as the decisions taken by any Nordic country 
will also affect the others in any case. 
Attention must be paid to communications in order for changes to seem justified and positive in terms 
of their impacts on both human wellbeing and the economy. So far, not everyone has been engaged 
in the joint effort by means such as the media. There is still work to be done to ensure that 
responsibility is fairly divided between everyone. 
It is important to consider whether Finnish energy and industrial production will bear international 
comparison and avoid harmful leakages (investment, carbon and harvest leakages). The development 
of technology and innovations plays a key role in terms of implementing the long-term strategy. 
Finland is especially well positioned in energy and low-carbon technologies, not only domestically, 
but also on international markets. Successful domestic demonstrations provide valuable references 
for the Finnish technology industry on international markets and in developing new business. At the 
same time, however, the business community perceives the unpredictability of legislation to be the 
main factor slowing down climate action. 
The strategy development work was criticised, among other things, by pointing out that the existing 
political  steering  instruments  had  failed  to  embed  a  science-based  overall  picture  in  central 
government and as part of preparatory work. The direction is right, but the pace is still hopelessly too 
slow. The strategy pays less attention to analysis of global impacts and dependencies. 
The central government is also obliged to ensure that climate action is in line with its human rights 
obligations and will reduce rather than increase inequality. It is therefore necessary to incorporate 
assessment of fundamental and human rights into legislation and strategies as well as their drafting 
and application. 
When the strategy is specified, it is advisable to pay varied attention to the kinds of effects that 
different options will have on people’s everyday lives. Among other things, it is necessary to better 
identify vulnerable groups most affected by environmental changes and measures to combat these. 
   
 Annex 1  4 
 
 
Responses from the Sámi Parliament 
 
The following passages present the responses to the public consultation on Finland’s long-term 
strategy given by the Sámi Parliament, which represents the Sámi people, the only indigenous people 
within the European Union, and expresses their official positions. The Sámi Parliament’s responses 
are provided in full without summarising. 
Question 1: 
The 2050 emission reduction target for greenhouse gases (excl. the land use sector) is set at 87.5% 
under the Continuous Growth scenario and at 90% under the Savings scenario compared to 1990 
levels. Both of the low-emission scenarios also achieve the 2035 carbon neutrality target. 
The Sámi Parliamentary Council (SPC) is the cooperation body for the Sámi Parliaments of the 
Nordic countries. In its climate policy strategy of 14 April 2010, the SPC demanded significant cuts 
in emissions. Comparing emission levels to a single year, 1990, treats different states unequally, 
making it possible for some states to basically not have to make any emission reductions at all. The 
SPC proposed that the average emissions of states between 1990 and 2000 be adopted as the point of 
reference. The SPC demanded that states reduce their greenhouse gas emissions from this average by 
40% by 2020 and by 90% by 2050. 
Question 2: 
Cf. responses to ‘any other comments’ below. 
Question 3: 
The planning and implementation of emission reductions should be examined in a broader context: 
Continuous environmental loading and increased exploitation of natural resources will make it 
difficult for Sámi people to adapt to climate change and the same will also apply to adaptation of 
Sámi livelihoods, way of life and subsistence to changing climate conditions. Measures to strengthen 
carbon sinks and stocks must be carried out so as to avoid any negative effects on the indigenous 
Sámi people’s health and livelihoods. The best way for the Sámi community to adapt to climate 
change is to reduce vulnerability while also contributing to preservation of people, animals and 
nature’s carrying capacity in Sámiland. 
Question 4: 
Finland’s long-term strategy development should take account of the Sámi people’s rights as an 
indigenous people as well as the specific issues based on the Arctic location of the Sámi homeland 
and the above-mentioned rights of indigenous peoples. The Sámi Parliament represents the Sámi 
people in national and international contexts. The long-term strategy does not consider the transition 
to a low-emission society from the perspective of regional or social justice; instead, its underlying 
calculations are based on the premise that emission reduction costs will be minimised across the 
country. 
The Sámi Parliament considers it important that Finland’s long-term strategy to be submitted to the 
European Commission recognise the special obligations created by the Sámi people’s status as an 
indigenous people at the national and EU levels. Although the strategy does not specify the allocation 
of emission reductions, its scenarios are based on qualitative and quantitative assumptions for 
different sectors. The Sámi Parliament stresses that the special characteristics of the Sámi homeland 
 Annex 1  5 
 
 
should be taken into account in each sector from the outset. As they now stand, the modelled scenarios 
seem to include assumptions that, if realised, would likely produce even quite extensive impacts from 
the perspectives of the Sámi people’s traditional livelihoods and rights as an indigenous people. These 
may cover assumptions relating to biofuels, battery minerals and electric vehicles, wind power 
generation, as well as forest growth and roundwood removals. Wind power must not cause more than 
insignificant impediment to the Sámi people’s traditional livelihoods, such as reindeer herding. The 
assumptions on forestry rest on the existing Best Practices for Sustainable Forest Management, the 
effectiveness of which for the Sámi homeland can justifiably be called into question. According to 
the Government Programme, “Emissions reduction measures will be carried out in a way that is fair 
from a social and regional perspective and that involves all sectors of society.” 
Carbon neutrality must be pursued with due consideration for the language of the Paris Agreement’s 
Article 2.1(b), which provides that the ability to adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change and 
foster climate resilience and low greenhouse gas emissions development should be increased in a 
manner that does not threaten food production. From the Sámi people’s perspective, food security 
applies to ensuring the utilisation of natural resources – fish stocks, berries and game – at least as 
essentially as to securing the commercial supply of food. The Sámi people’s traditional livelihoods 
play an essential role in safeguarding their food security and their pursuit is based on traditional 
wisdom and knowledge of nature. In terms of adaptation to climate change and Sámi people’s food 
autonomy, it is also necessary to examine the means to promote practices of sustainable resource 
management based on traditional wisdom. Reindeer play a demonstrably important role in mitigating 
climate change in fell environments. 
As the impacts of climate change are already visible in the Sámi homeland, the Sámi Parliament 
wishes to underline the importance of creating a mechanism for Sámi people’s adaptation measures 
(such as a Sámi climate change panel). It is of the utmost importance to provide earmarked operational 
funds in order to enable Sámi people’s own climate change adaptation and monitoring efforts based 
on their traditional wisdom and the observations and problem-solving methods of those pursuing 
traditional  livelihoods,  Sámi  research,  as  well  as  their  civic  knowledge  and  representation. 
Furthermore, projects to improve the energy efficiency of snowmobiles and ATVs should be launched 
urgently. These vehicles are necessary in Sámi people’s traditional livelihoods, but they should be 
developed to release less emissions while ATVs, in particular, should be developed to improve safety 
and reduce rutting. In its 2014 recommendations to Finland (E/C.12/FIN/CO/6), the UN Committee 
on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights stressed the need to mitigate the adverse effect of climate 
change on the Sámi people and the Sámi homeland’s natural resources.
 Annex 2  1 
 
 
Balance between GHG emissions and removals under different 
scenarios 
 
GHG emissions balance under the WEM scenario (excl. LULUCF). 
 
Gg (CO-eq) 
2 2010  2015  2020  2030  2035  2040  2050 
Emission category 
1A Emissions from fuel combustion  60,095  40,715  39,992  33,802  31,428  26,062  15,244 
1A1 Energy industries  30,947  17,766  16,875  12,899  12,352  9,422  5,757 
1A2 Manufacturing industries and  10,250  6,949  8,522  8,204  8,054  7,996  3,838 
construction 
1A3 Transport  12,712  11,109  11,090  9,832  8,542  6,447  3,900 
1A4 Other sectors  4,982  3,803  2,413  1,821  1,460  1,207  822 
1A5 Other fuel use  1,204  1,088  1,092  1,047  1,019  989  927 
1B Fugitive emissions from fuels  142  146  141  129  123  120  118 
2 Industrial processes and product use  6,147  5,861  6,350  6,161  4,849  4,647  4,412 
2A Mineral industry  1,167  964  1,171  1,183  1,029  1,044  1,125 
2B Chemical industry  1,016  1,170  1,340  1,375  387  351  221 
2C Metal industry  2,439  2,142  2,446  2,724  2,740  2,737  2,608 
2D Non-energy use  85  104  95  100  102  104  107 
2F F-gases  1,438  1,480  1,298  778  591  410  351 
3 Agriculture  6,630  6,491  6,571  6,548  6,491  6,455  6,342 
3A Enteric fermentation  2,099  2,117  2,078  2,046  2,008  1,970  1,864 
3B Manure management  748  751  819  788  743  719  662 
3D Agricultural soils  3,502  3,439  3,448  3,486  3,513  3,539  3,589 
3F Field burning of agricultural residues  2  3  3  3  3  3  3 
3G Liming  277  180  222  222  222  222  222 
3H Urea application  2  2  2  2  2  2  2 
5 Waste management  2,583  2,134  1,644  1,041  793  629  452 
5 Waste disposal  2,194  1,766  1,268  699  455  295  126 
5B Biological treatment of waste  144  113  100  100  100  100  100 
5D Wastewater treatment and discharge  246  254  276  242  238  235  225 
Indirect CO emissions  68  53  76  76  76  76  76 
2
Emissions without LULUCF  75,664  55,400  54,774  47,757  43,759  37,989  26,644 
 
NB! Agricultural emission results do not correspond exactly to those provided by the Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke). 
 
Luke’s estimates are presented in a Finnish-language report available at: https://www.vtt.fi/inf/pdf/technology/2020/T366.pdf. 
 Annex 2  2 
 
 
GHG emissions balance under the Continuous Growth scenario (excl. LULUCF). 
 
Gg (CO-eq) 
2 2010  2015  2020  2030  2035  2040  2050 
Emission category 
1A Emissions from fuel combustion  60,095  40,715  38,292  23,595  14,307  7,473  3,340 
1A1 Energy industries  30,947  17,766  17,098  9,137  5,875  4,267  2,524 
1A2 Manufacturing industries and  10,250  6,949  7,569  6,356  4,170  1,589  32 
construction 
1A3 Transport  12,712  11,109  10,091  5,668  2,498  1,069  351 
1A4 Other sectors  4,982  3,803  2,442  1,387  745  332  265 
1A5 Other fuel use  1,204  1,088  1,092  1,047  1,019  215  168 
1B Fugitive emissions from fuels  142  146  136  123  82  73  53 
2 Industrial processes and product use  6,147  5,861  6,328  5,797  3,410  3,223  1,664 
2A Mineral industry  1,167  964  1,090  1,113  1,187  1,257  1,263 
2B Chemical industry  1,016  1,170  1,340  1,375  387  351  220 
2C Metal industry  2,439  2,142  2,412  2,596  1,304  1,350  0 
2D Non-energy use  85  104  95  100  101  103  107 
2F F-gases  1,438  1,480  1,391  612  430  161  75 
3 Agriculture  6,630  6,491  6,358  5,158  4,629  4,132  3,436 
3A Enteric fermentation  2,099  2,117  1,989  1,537  1,375  1,256  1,105 
3B Manure management  748  751  764  629  568  467  378 
3D Agricultural soils  3,502  3,439  3,395  2,826  2,529  2,261  1,816 
3F Field burning of agricultural residues  2  3  3  3  3  3  3 
3G Liming  277  180  207  162  153  143  132 
3H Urea application  2  2  2  2  2  2  2 
5 Waste management  2,583  2,134  1,643  1,004  711  540  346 
5 Waste disposal  2,194  1,766  1,266  662  462  304  133 
5B Biological treatment of waste  144  113  100  100  100  100  100 
5D Wastewater treatment and discharge  246  254  276  242  149  137  113 
Indirect CO emissions  68  53  62  62  62  62  62 
2
Emissions without LULUCF  75,664  55,400  52,819  35,738  23,200  15,503  8,900 
 
NB! Agricultural emission results do not correspond exactly to those provided by the Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke). 
 
Luke’s estimates are presented in a Finnish-language report available at: https://www.vtt.fi/inf/pdf/technology/2020/T366.pdf. 
 Annex 2  3 
 
 
GHG emissions balance under the Savings scenario (excl. LULUCF). 
 
Gg (CO-eq) 
2 2010  2015  2020  2030  2035  2040  2050 
Emission category 
1A Emissions from fuel combustion  60,095  40,715  39,623  25,423  4,416  -6  -7,834 
1A1 Energy industries  30,947  17,766  17,572  8,501  -1,371  -3,120  -
11,467 
1A2 Manufacturing industries and  10,250  6,949  7,887  8,739  2,080  349  1,436 
construction 
1A3 Transport  12,712  11,109  10,660  6,959  3,053  2,242  1,777 
1A4 Other sectors  4,982  3,803  2,412  612  403  301  252 
1A5 Other fuel use  1,204  1,088  1,092  612  250  222  168 
1B Fugitive emissions from fuels  142  146  139  145  90  84  67 
2 Industrial processes and product use  6,147  5,861  6,438  5,655  3,546  3,379  1,796 
2A Mineral industry  1,167  964  1,095  926  772  772  848 
2B Chemical industry  1,016  1,170  1,350  1,375  1,124  1,082  758 
2C Metal industry  2,439  2,142  2,506  2,642  1,239  1,261  0 
2D Non-energy use  85  104  95  100  101  103  107 
2F F-gases  1,438  1,480  1,391  612  310  161  83 
3 Agriculture  6,630  6,491  6,316  5,299  4,877  4,441  4,043 
3A Enteric fermentation  2,099  2,117  1,979  1,654  1,526  1,399  1,295 
3B Manure management  748  751  735  609  616  495  532 
3D Agricultural soils  3,502  3,439  3,395  2,856  2,559  2,375  2,052 
3F Field burning of agricultural residues  2  3  3  3  3  3  3 
3G Liming  277  180  202  175  171  167  160 
3H Urea application  2  2  2  2  2  2  2 
5 Waste management  2,583  2,134  1,646  1,023  710  539  348 
5 Waste disposal  2,194  1,766  1,270  681  461  303  135 
5B Biological treatment of waste  144  113  100  100  100  100  100 
5D Wastewater treatment and discharge  246  254  276  242  149  137  113 
Indirect CO emissions  68  53  62  62  62  62  62 
2
Emissions without LULUCF  75,664  55,400  54,223  37,606  13,700  8,500  -1,518 
 
NB! Agricultural emission results do not correspond exactly to those provided by the Natural Resources Institute Finland (Luke). 
Luke’s estimates are presented in a Finnish-language report available at: https://www.vtt.fi/inf/pdf/technology/2020/T366.pdf. 
   
 Annex 2  4 
 
 
Estimated trends in emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector under different scenarios. 
 
Table 1. Historical emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector by land use category and for harvested wood products 
for 2010 and 2015 and their trends by 2050 under the WEM scenario (Mt CO2-eq). 
  2010  2015  2020  2025  2030  2035  2040  2045  2050 
Forest land  -32.20  -28.29  -30.64  -28.16  -25.00  -26.66  -28.01  -31.20  -34.43 
Cropland  7.66  7.11  6.72  7.38  7.59  7.65  7.68  7.76  7.88 
Grassland  0.75  0.67  0.88  1.12  1.25  1.31  1.28  1.28  1.28 
Wetlands  2.11  2.21  2.07  1.95  1.87  1.86  1.85  1.78  1.70 
Settlements  1.73  0.97  1.31  1.30  1.27  1.18  1.11  1.02  0.92 
Harvested wood 
-2.20  -2.73  -3.81  -3.64  -3.50  -3.29  -3.16  -3.08  -2.98 
products 
Total  -22.15  -20.07  -23.46  -20.05  -16.52  -17.94  -19.25  -22.44  -25.63 
 
Table 2. Historical emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector by land use category and for harvested wood products 
for 2010 and 2015 and their trends by 2050 under the Continuous Growth scenario (Mt CO2-eq). 
  2010  2015  2020  2025  2030  2035  2040  2045  2050 
Forest land  -32.20  -28.29  -26.29  -25.09  -23.53  -27.48  -31.34  -36.56  -42.17 
Cropland  7.66  7.11  6.63  5.92  5.11  4.23  3.31  2.44  1.59 
Grassland  0.75  0.67  0.74  0.86  1.02  1.19  1.35  1.37  1.40 
Wetlands  2.11  2.21  1.86  1.85  1.86  1.91  1.93  2.16  2.40 
Settlements  1.73  0.97  1.32  1.34  1.32  1.25  1.17  1.08  0.99 
Harvested wood 
-2.20  -2.73  -3.81  -3.94  -4.09  -3.95  -3.99  -4.12  -4.21 
products 
Total  -22.15  -20.07  -19.55  -19.05  -18.31  -22.84  -27.56  -33.62  -40.02 
 
Table 3. Historical emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector by land use category and for harvested wood products 
for 2010 and 2015 and their trends by 2050 under the Savings scenario (Mt CO2-eq). 
  2010  2015  2020  2025  2030  2035  2040  2045  2050 
Forest land  -32.20  -28.29  -25.89  -21.40  -16.14  -14.77  -13.01  -14.45  -15.85 
Cropland  7.66  7.11  6.64  6.09  5.47  4.77  4.02  3.31  2.63 
Grassland  0.75  0.67  0.74  0.78  0.85  0.93  1.00  1.07  1.13 
Wetlands  2.11  2.21  2.07  1.86  1.68  1.49  1.30  1.30  1.30 
Settlements  1.73  0.97  1.32  1.30  1.24  1.16  1.06  0.93  0.82 
Harvested wood 
-2.20  -2.73  -3.90  -4.32  -4.67  -5.32  -5.95  -6.19  -6.42 
products 
Total  -22.15  -20.07  -19.03  -15.70  -11.58  -11.75  -11.58  -14.03  -16.39 
 
 Appendix 3  1 
 
 
Descriptions of scenario modelling processes 
 
The scenarios were modelled using the following calculation models: 
 
  the TIMES-VTT model: energy production and energy systems, including production 
scenarios for harvested wood products; 
  the REMA model: energy consumption of the building stock; 
  the DREMFIA model: agriculture; 
  the MELA software: development of forest resources; 
  the FINAGE model: economic trends. 
 
These models and other methods used in modelling are described below. 
 
Description of the TIMES-VTT model and its database 
A key tool used to model and analyse the scenarios is the broad TIMES-VTT energy system model 
developed by VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd, which covers global energy production 
and consumption as well as greenhouse gas emissions. The model is based on the global ETSAP 
TIAM model (Loulou 2008, Loulou & Labriet 2008), which was developed through international 
cooperation, building on the IEA ETSAP TIMES modelling system (Loulou et al. 2016). The TIMES-
VTT model describes energy systems in Finland, the Nordic countries and the rest of Europe. 
Methodologically, it is a so-called partial equilibrium model, which maximises the total economic 
surplus of consumers and producers. The model includes detailed descriptions of both the current 
system of energy production and consumption and future technologies in terms of several different 
investment options. 
The TIMES-VTT model’s extensive database contains a detailed description of the current energy 
system, including the energy production and distribution system, building stock, energy uses in 
housing and services, stock of cars and other vehicles, processes and plants for manufacturing energy-
intensive industrial products, other industrial energy end uses, as well as energy use in agriculture 
and forestry. The model database also covers estimates of energy system removals, such as removals 
from energy production plants, buildings and vehicles. However, the largest part of the database 
naturally consists of technological descriptions of investment options in future energy systems, 
including estimated trends in their costs and technical performance (energy production efficiencies, 
service  life,  usability,  etc.).  The  model  also  depicts  regional  technical  potential  of  energy 
commodities, the global fuel trade, emissions trading (incl. trade in CO  transport and storage 
2
services). The TIMES-VTT model and its databases have been discussed in several scientific articles 
(Koljonen et al. 2009, Koljonen & Lehtilä 2015, Lehtilä & Koljonen 2018). 
The energy system model’s solution is based on maximising the producer and consumer surplus and 
the resulting energy supply and end use system therefore satisfies the demand for useful energy as 
cost-efficiently as possible, taking account of factors such as taxes, subsidies and return on investment 
requirements in different sectors of the economy. The model also allows a wide variety of limitations 
to be set on the system’s development. By way of example, several forms of energy production have 
been assigned upper or lower limits for production, capacity or market share, which the solution must 
accommodate. The model examines energy consumption and production on the basis of consistent 
principles, so as to account for the interaction between production investments and the opportunities 
to enhance energy efficiency. 
 Appendix 3  2 
 
 
The TIMES-VTT model covers all of the GHG emissions under the Kyoto Protocol and their 
reduction  technologies  and/or  methods.  Consequently,  the  low-emission  scenarios  assume  that 
emission reductions will be carried out in all sectors generating GHG emissions (excluding the 
LULUCF sector) in the order of cost. Another example of limitations set for the scenarios is the 
emission cap set for effort sharing sectors. The model examines energy consumption and production 
on  the  basis  of  identical  principles,  so  as  to  account  for  the  interaction  between  production 
investments and the opportunities to enhance energy efficiency. 
The level of energy consumption and trend in emissions calculated in the TIMES-VTT model depend 
on several factors provided as baseline data. The key baseline data used by the model includes: 
  trends in different economic sectors, including industrial sectors, households, services, agriculture and forestry, and 
extractive industries; 
  trends in production of different products in energy-intensive industrial sectors; 
  the existing stock of cars and other vehicles and trends in mobility and transport needs by mode of transport; 
  the existing building stock and trends in inhabitable surface area by type of building; 
  existing energy and climate policy steering instruments, incl. energy and emission taxes, subsidies, and regulations, 
legal statutes and other such instruments adopted to increase energy efficiency; 
  quantitative removals from the plant and equipment base in the current energy system and the assumed 
development of available technological options in all sectors both in terms of technical parameters and costs. 
The energy system model produces a trajectory for an energy supply and end use system that can 
satisfy the demand for useful energy as cost-efficiently as possible, taking account of factors such as 
taxes, subsidies and return on investment requirements of parties operating in different sectors. The 
results produced by the model cover the annual flows of all of the energy commodities, materials and 
emissions described in the model from production, import and inventories to end use, export, storage 
and disposal or recycling. The results for the levels of GHG emissions can be broken down by sector 
and emission type and, where necessary, by process. The results also include details such as the 
capacities, investment costs and operating costs for all of the production plants and technologies 
described in the model. The model further produces results for energy commodity prices, which 
represent long-term equilibrium prices. 
MMooddeell  sscceennaarriiooss  
MMooddeell  iinnppuutt TTIIMMEESS--VVTTTT::  1155  gglloobbaall  rreeggiioonnss  ++  55  nnoorrddiicc MMooddeell  rreessuullttss
ddaattaa
rreeggiioonnss  ((FFIINN,,  FFII--MMeettrroo,,  DDNNKK,,  NNOORR,,  SSWWEE)) EEnneerrggyy  pprroodduuccttiioonn
••BByy  ppeerriioodd
RReessoouurrcceess EEnneerrggyy   TTrraannss-- DDeemmaanndd   ••BByy  tteecchhnnoollooggyy
••FFoossssiill  rreessoouurrcceess ccoonnvveerrssiioonn mmiissssiioonn  // tteecchhnnoollooggiieess ••BByy  eenneerrggyy  ssoouurrccee
••RREE  ppootteennttiiaallss
••LLaanndd  uussee ddiissttrriibbuuttiioonn IInndduussttrryy  sseeccttoorrss ••EEBBnnyyee  pprreeggrriiyyoo  ddeenndd--uussee
••EElleeccttrriicciittyy ••EElleeccttrriicciittyy  ggrriidd ••CCHHPP  //  bbooiilleerrss ••BByy  sseeccttoorr  //  eenndd--uussee
••CCHHPP ••DDiissttrriicctt   ••MMaannuuff..pprroocceesssseess ••BByy  eenneerrggyy  ssoouurrccee
TTeecchhnnoollooggyy ••HHeeaatt hheeaattiinngg  ggrriidd ••BByy  tteecchhnnoollooggyy
••EExxiissttiinngg  ssyysstteemmss ••FFuueell  rreeffiinniinngg ••GGaass  ggrriidd TTeerrttiiaarryy  sseeccttoorrss
••EEnneerrggyy  ttrraaddee   ••HHyyddrrooggeenn ••OOtthheerr  ffuueellss ••HHeeaattiinngg  ssyysstteemmss EEmmiissssiioonnss
iinnffrraassttrruuccttuurree pprroodduuccttiioonn ddiissttrriibbuuttiioonn ••HHWW  ssyysstteemmss ••BByy  ppeerriioodd
••~~11550000  nneeww  tteecchhss ••CCoooolliinngg  ssyysstteemmss ••BByy  sseeccttoorr
iinn  eeaacchh  rreeggiioonn ••LLiigghhttiinngg ••BByy  eemmiissssiioonn  ttyyppee
••OOtthheerr  aapppplliiaanncceess
CCoossttss
DDeemmaannddss TTrraannssppoorrtt  sseeccttoorrss ••CCoossttss  bbyy  ppeerriioodd  aanndd  
ccoosstt  ttyyppee
••~~6600  ddeemmaannddss   ••PPaassss..  ttrraannssppoorrtt ••IInnvveessttmmeennttss
((uusseeffuull  sseerrvviicceess)) ••FFrreeiigghhtt  ttrraannssppoorrtt
iinn  eeaacchh  rreeggiioonn   ••IInnttll..  ttrraannssppoorrtt EEnneerrggyy  pprriicceess
••FFuueellss
••EElleeccttrriicciittyy
••DDiissttrriicctt  hheeaatt
 
Figure 1. The TIMES model components and a simplified structure diagram for one region. The diagram describes trade in key en-
ergy commodities between regions. 
 Appendix 3  3 
 
 
The TIMES-VTT model allows the user to freely choose an analysis interval all the way up to 2150, 
but its current version sets the base year at 2010. The model is calibrated to the detailed energy 
balances of the International Energy Agency (IEA) for all countries in 2010 and 2015. For Finland, 
these are based on the statistics submitted to the IEA by Statistics Finland, but the calculation method 
is slightly different from national energy statistics. 
The REMA model for energy consumption of the building stock 
The energy consumption of the building stock was calculated using the REMA model developed by 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland Ltd. The REMA model is a bottom-up model for 
calculating the energy consumption of the building stock, which is based on the use of representative 
standard buildings. Future trends in energy consumption were calculated on the basis of the volumes 
of new construction, renovations and annual removals projected for each category of intended use 
and age. The model divides the entire building stock based on the following intended uses: 
  one-dwelling houses; 
  terraced houses and residential blocks of flats; 
  commercial and public buildings; 
  free-time residences. 
The ‘commercial and public buildings’ include the following types of buildings used by Statistics 
Finland: commercial buildings, office buildings, transport and communications buildings, buildings 
for institutional care, assembly buildings, and educational buildings. Each type of building stock 
classified by intended use is further divided into age groups by year of completion. The age groups 
were determined with a view to taking account of developments in energy performance requirements 
as follows: 
  completed prior to 1959; 
  completed in 1960–1979; 
  completed in 1980–2009; 
  completed in 2010–2018; 
  forecast for 2019–2024; 
  forecast for 2025–2050. 
In each building category, energy for heating the facilities was modelled separately from heat losses 
due to ventilation and envelope (U-value and tightness). In addition to heating, the calculation 
includes energy required for domestic hot water, as well as real estate electricity and other electricity 
consumed by users. 
The REMA model allows the energy consumption levels of standard buildings to be derived from 
statistical data, estimated or obtained from simulated buildings. In this case, the modelling was based 
on data from Statistics Finland (2018) and prior studies (e.g. Tuominen et al. 2012 and Tuominen et 
al. 2013) for the existing building stock and on the baseline scenario for energy consumption in 
buildings published by the Finnish Environment Institute (Mattinen et al. 2016) for new buildings. 
The resulting baseline scenario, in turn, was used to derive the other scenarios by adapting these to 
each scenario narrative. A more detailed description of the REMA model is publicly available in 
Finnish (Tuominen et al. 2014). 
The DREMFIA partial equilibrium model for agriculture 
The DREMFIA model (Dynamic multiREgional sector Model of FInnish Agriculture; Lehtonen 
2001, 2015) is an economic partial equilibrium model covering the main production sectors, arable 
land use, domestic demand and foreign trade in Finnish agriculture within the following four major 
 Appendix 3  4 
 
 
regions: Southern Finland, Inland Finland, Ostrobothnia and Northern Finland (Lehtonen 2015). The 
major regions are divided into smaller production areas based on the division into aid zones, providing 
quite a precise description of aid policy. The DREMFIA model does not include reindeer, horse and 
sheep husbandry and the agricultural scenario analyses assume the numbers of these animals to 
remain close to 2018 levels through to 2050. Fur farming and horticultural production are also 
excluded from the model. Nevertheless, the model covers over 95% of agricultural land use. 
Structural development in Finnish agriculture was modelled endogenously, allowing for the growth 
observed in the number of dairy cows in the largest farm size categories and in Finland’s main 
production areas, which is taken into account in arable land use. The model was validated so as to 
more or less match actual developments in total livestock production volumes and arable land use in 
1995–2018. At the same time, the model takes account of the domestic consumption of Finnish 
agricultural products in parallel to changes in imports and exports. Domestic consumption may be 
satisfied with domestic production or competing imported products. Consumption for the 2019–2050 
period follows actual developments between 1995 and 2018 and consumption in 2018, unless 
otherwise determined in specific scenarios, as shown below. 
The model assumes that Finland is completely dependent on the input and product prices formed at 
EU and global levels. However, the price levels of domestic agricultural products may differ slightly 
from average EU prices. Product-specific deviations in the producer prices of milk and meat, for 
example, are realised in the model such that domestic and foreign products are treated as imperfect 
substitutes. In other words, they can substitute for each other to quite a large – yet limited – extent, 
being different in terms of quality. By way of example, Finland partially imports and exports different 
types of meat (different carcass parts) and different dairy products (of which the model includes 18 
different kinds). 
Animal feed consumption may adjust to different levels of output, guided by price ratios, within the 
framework of feed recommendations. Livestock production has a major impact on feed production 
and arable land use. Developments in surface areas used for different crops are also influenced by 
agricultural  support  and  the  prices  of  fertilisers  and  agricultural  products.  Consequently,  the 
DREMFIA  model  broadly  replicates  the  1995–2018  developments  in  Finland’s  agricultural 
production and land use, including the key variables required to assess agricultural trajectories and 
trends in GHG emissions from agriculture through to 2050. 
The agricultural trajectory covers annual developments through to 2050. The model was originally 
designed  and  implemented  so  as  to  specifically  enable  the  assessment  of  agricultural  support 
payments under the EU Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), including the terms of support, and the 
effects of Finland’s national agricultural policy measures on the volume and placement of agricultural 
production and agricultural income in Finland. The most recent study on this subject was published 
by Lehtonen & Niemi (2018). The DREMFIA model was also applied when assessing the impacts of 
market changes, the agri-environmental scheme (Lehtonen & Rankinen 2015) and changing climate 
(Lehtonen 2015) on agricultural production, arable land use and income. The population projections 
by Statistics Finland (Tilastokeskus 2015) and trends in energy prices forecast up until the mid-
century are taken into account in DREMFIA modelling, which produces the inputs required to 
calculate greenhouse gases, also taking account of the numbers of reindeer, sheep, horses and fur 
animals. 
The DREMFIA sector model allows inclusion of changes determined in different scenarios for crop 
yields, agricultural productivity, input use and agricultural support, as well as the EU prices of 
agricultural end products and inputs. By way of example, fertiliser tax – which is not currently levied 
but can be determined in different scenarios – will have a direct effect on reducing crop fertilisation 
 Appendix 3  5 
 
 
and yield levels in the model. Fertiliser tax and any possible new or substitute forms of agricultural 
support for grasslands with low fertiliser levels will encourage the use of nitrogen-fixing grass-clover 
mixtures. This will be implemented in the model such that silage grass production based on intensive 
inorganic nitrogen fertilisation will decline and will be partially replaced with grass production with 
low fertiliser and yield levels (Lehtonen & Niskanen 2016). The effects of biogas production on 
livestock production may be taken into account by assuming a slight reduction in energy costs in 
livestock production, but any more precise change in input use will be omitted for the time being, 
because the model does not include specific details of biogas production. 
In this study, the baseline data for GHG calculations produced by the DREMFIA model includes 
nitrogen contained in chemical fertilisers, arable land use and numbers of animals for the main 
categories  of  livestock.  Future  developments  in  livestock  weight,  nitrogen  excretion  and  milk 
production will continue to follow those reported in the GHG inventory. 
Calculations for the land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector 
The scenarios for the land use, land-use change and forestry (LULUCF) sector were made up of 
scenarios separately calculated for harvested wood products and for each land use category. The 
process of drafting the scenarios was divided into four phases. The first phase produced scenarios for 
the surface areas of land use categories and land-use change categories; surface areas constitute a key 
baseline data set for LULUCF calculations. Forest development scenarios, mostly focusing on the 
development of growing stock, formed a separate phase. The production scenarios for harvested wood 
products were created using the TIMES-VTT model and its results were used as baseline data for 
calculating changes in the carbon stocks of harvested wood products. The fourth phase consisted of 
non-forest land use categories and land-use change categories. 
Determining surface areas for land use and land-use change 
Emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector were calculated in six land use categories covering 
Finland’s land area and inland waters. Marine waters were excluded from the analysis. Land-use 
change areas were estimated using a method proposed by Haakana et al. (2015), accounting for each 
scenario’s underlying assumptions on factors such as wind farms or field afforestation (Kärkkäinen 
et al. 2019). The land-use change scenarios are premised on the trends calculated from previous 
changes in land use and averages of annual land-use change areas. These were supplemented with 
each scenario’s updated assumptions. Historical data is the same as that used in the MALULU project 
(Aakkula et al. 2019). Furthermore, emission calculations made use of surface area data from 
Finland’s most recent GHG inventory (Tilastokeskus 2019). The total of Finland’s land area and 
inland waters was  assumed to remain constant at 33.8 million hectares through to 2050. This 
standardised total area is also used in the GHG inventory, although it is known that there is some 
change from marine water to land. The use of the standardised area does not have any significant 
bearing on the scenarios. 
In addition to the historical data and calculated trends, developments in settlements under different 
scenarios were guided by the TIMES-VTT model’s quantitative estimates on trends in solar and wind 
power under different scenarios and, for transport routes, the railway projects already decided. The 
area required for a single wind farm was estimated at 2 hectares with the average farm size of 2–5 
MW (Niemi 2019, Mikkonen 2019). The area required for a single one-TWh solar power plant built 
onshore was estimated at 1,000 ha, which was used to convert output figures into hectares (Lehtilä 
2019). 
 Appendix 3  6 
 
 
Energy peat production was estimated to develop in different alternative scenarios in keeping with 
the  peat  energy  output  (PJ/yr)  produced  by  the  TIMES-VTT  model.  The  production  area 
corresponding  to  energy  output  was  derived  by  scaling  known  surface  areas  and  energy  use. 
Environmental peat production was assumed to remain at current levels. 
The LULUCF Continuous Growth and Savings scenarios cover assumptions on the growth in the area 
used for bioenergy crops, on the one hand, and the sharp decline in cropland area. As a result, more 
croplands will be converted into forest land or grassland than under the WEM scenario. 
Using the MELA software to model the development of forest resources 
The  harvesting  projections  of  the  different  scenarios  that  correspond  to  the  use  of  domestic 
commercial timber, forest chips and fuel wood and the development of forest resources contingent 
on these (growing stock volume, biomass, growth) and drain (harvesting and natural drain) were 
calculated using the MELA2016 software developed by the Finnish Environment Centre (Hirvelä et 
al. 2017). The results of MELA calculations were used to assess change in the carbon stocks of 
moorland soil and forested peatlands. Under the WEM scenario, regional roundwood removal targets 
corresponding to the use of commercial timber and energy wood were determined in keeping with 
the LULUCF sector’s WEM scenario developed for a report on the development of emissions and 
sinks in the agricultural and LULUCF sectors until 2050 (Aakkula et al. 2019). The forest industry 
production  volumes  calculated  under  the  Continuous  Growth  and  Savings  scenarios  using  the 
TIMES-VTT model were converted into forest industry wood consumption volumes by means of 
coefficients. Consumption volumes were estimated taking account of commercial timber imports. 
These consumption volumes of domestic commercial timber and energy wood under the Continuous 
Growth and Savings scenarios were further converted into regional roundwood removals, which were 
used to calculate the MELA cutting removal projections. 
 
 Appendix 3  7 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Calculation steps to forecast trends in forest GHG emissions and removals. 
The baseline data on forest resources used in the projections consisted of topographic data from the 
11th and 12th National Forest Inventories (NFI) covering the 2013–2017 inventory period, with the 
exception of NFI11 data for Upper Lapland covering a period from 2012 to 2013 (VMI 2013 & 2017). 
The data consisted of a total of 58,074 management units based on sample plots of forest and 
scrubland. The management units were divided into three management categories: mainly timber 
production, limited timber production, and excluded from timber production. The management 
category sets the parameters for stand-specific forest harvesting and management measures permitted 
at each specific site. The results on forest resources cover the total of all three categories, although 
no measures were focused on non-production areas. 
The MELA stand simulator automatically produced a number of alternative trajectories for each 
management unit, comprising natural processes (reproduction, growth and death of trees), forest 
harvesting and forest management work. Under all of the scenarios, forest management complied 
with the Best Practices for Sustainable Forest Management by Tapio Ltd (Äijälä et al. 2014, Koistinen 
et al. 2016). 
 Appendix 3  8 
 
 
The  harvesting  projections  were  determined  in  regional  optimisation  calculations,  which  used 
maximum financial performance of timber production at a 4% required rate of return as the target 
variable and the roundwood removal targets specified in each scenario for different types of timber 
as constraints. The financial performance of commercial timber production was calculated on the 
basis of roadside prices, while the figure applied to energy wood was the price paid for chips at the 
point of use. Roadside prices were derived by adding up statistical stumpage prices and average actual 
harvesting  costs.  Point-of-use  prices  for  forest  chips  followed  statistical  average  prices.  Cost 
calculations were based on statistical unit prices for different types of work and on time consumption 
levels  according  to  productivity  models,  allowing  for  factors  such  as  the effect  of  harvesting 
conditions (sturdiness of trees to be removed, drain per hectare, the number of residual trees and soil). 
The tree basal-area growth model used in the MELA software was calibrated on the basis of diameter 
growth measurements in NFI11 data, which had first been indexed to the average 1984–2013 growth 
level. Furthermore, the volume growth estimate produced by the MELA software was specified in 
the scenarios by taking account of the effects on the growing stock increment of increases in average 
temperature and air CO  concentration from the mid-year of the calibration period, 1999, to 2017. 
2
The volume growth estimate made use of the same method as the report on development of emissions 
and sinks in the agricultural and LULUCF sectors until 2050 (Aakkula et al. 2019). 
This report’s WEM scenario assumptions on developments in forestry and its operating environment 
were the same as those used in the LULUCF-WEM scenario developed by Aakkula et al. (2019). 
However, the MALUSEPO calculations presented here differed from the MALULU calculations 
described by Aakkula et al. (2019) in terms such as calculation data and the timeliness of price and 
cost data, simulated stand-level management operations and residue calculations. 
Calculating emissions and removals in the LULUCF sector 
The aim was to calculate GHG emissions and removals for the scenarios as consistently as possible 
with the classifications and methods used in Finland’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory (GHG inventory) 
by Statistics Finland (Tilastokeskus 2019). The inventory classifications and methods are based on 
the  UN  Climate  Change  Convention’s  reporting  guidelines  and  those  drawn  up  by  the 
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). The LULUCF sector calculations comply with 
the 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (IPCC 2006). The scenarios’ 
emissions and removals are made up of the living biomass of carbon stocks, deadwood, forest litter 
and soil changes (CO ), as well as methane (CH ) and nitrous oxide (N O) emissions. The scenarios 
2 4 2
neither assume nor take account of changes in climate. In calculations requiring weather data (such 
as Yasso modelling), the annual weather from 2017 to 2050 is the average of 1980–2017. The carbon 
content used for matter, such as biomass, is 50%. Carbon was converted into carbon dioxide (CO ) 
2
using the factor of (-44/12). Gases were converted into carbon dioxide equivalents with the global 
warming potential (GWP) factors of the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report used in the GHG inventory, 
which are 1 for CO , 25 for CH , and 298 for N O. The land use classification used in the scenarios 
2 4 2
corresponds to the classification of Finland’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory (Tilastokeskus 2019), which 
is described in the report on development of emissions and sinks in the agricultural and LULUCF 
sectors until 2050 (Aakkula et al. 2019). 
The LULUCF sector comprises six land use categories – forest land, cropland, grassland, wetlands, 
settlements and other land – as well as harvested wood products. In the scenario calculations, each 
land use category was further divided into two components such that the emissions/removals for each 
specific year include: 1) emissions from land-use changes made in the year in question and the 
emissions and removals of land-use change areas converted over the preceding 19  years; and 
2) emissions/removals from areas with no land-use changes within the last 20 years. 
 Appendix 3  9 
 
 
Under the scenarios, the land-use and land-use change areas continue a reported time series, which 
means that the emissions and removals of land-use change areas included in point (1) above may 
contain emissions/removals from areas converted in 2017 up until 2036. This applies to the WEM 
scenario, in particular. 
Changes in the carbon stocks of growing stock on forest land (that has been forest land for over 20 
years) were calculated as the difference between growing stock biomass stocks over 10-yearly periods 
produced by the MELA modelling process. Soil calculation inputs of forest litter generated by green 
trees, natural drain and harvesting residue are also MELA results. For afforested lands (that have been 
forest land for no more than 20 years), change in growing stock carbon stocks was calculated in 
keeping with the GHG inventory, using estimates for the average growing stock increment and drain 
of afforested lands based on data from the National Forest Inventory (Tilastokeskus 2019). Changes 
in mineral soil carbon stocks were estimated using the Yasso07 soil model, while the CO , CH , N O 
2 4 2
emissions from drained peatlands were calculated with the emission factors of the Greenhouse Gas 
Inventory  (Tilastokeskus  2019).  N O  emissions  from  nitrogen  fertilisation  and  CH   and  N O 
2 4 2
emissions from prescribed burning were calculated as an average of actual emissions from 2012 to 
2016, as reported, while N O emissions from  nitrogen mineralisation were also calculated for 
2
afforested lands (Tilastokeskus 2019). Area data for various types of forested peatlands was derived 
as a result of MELA calculations. 
Changes in the carbon stocks of cropland mineral soils were estimated using the Yasso07 soil model. 
Conversely, no changes in mineral soil carbon stocks were assumed for grasslands. The GHG 
inventory emission factors were used for both cropland and grassland peatlands. Plant biomasses and 
litter inputs for each plant species were calculated in accordance with the GHG inventory, as were 
changes in biomass and deadwood carbon stocks and N O emissions from nitrogen mineralisation 
2
and leaching (Tilastokeskus 2019). 
Wetlands are divided into divergent subcategories: peat production areas, sparsely wooded mires 
reverted from forest land and waters with forest structures. Their emissions were calculated using the 
methods and factors of the GHG inventory (Tilastokeskus 2019). 
The results for settlements only include emissions and removals from land-use change areas. Twenty 
years after conversion, change areas are moved to the category of areas that have been settlements 
for at least 20 years, where no carbon stock changes were assumed, in keeping with the GHG 
inventory (Tilastokeskus 2019). 
The impact of harvested wood products was calculated using a production-based approach, where the 
method was a first order decay function using product half-lives and specific conversion factors for 
each product group. The main groups of harvested wood products are sawn timber, wood panels, 
paper and board. The half-lives used were 35 years for sawn timber, 25 years for wood panels and 2 
years for paper and board. Each scenario’s input assumptions on forest industry production trends 
were harmonised with different model calculations and wood demand was based on TIMES-VTT 
modelling results. The low-emission scenarios assumed the forest industry value added to increase, 
while also including new products. With regard to the mechanical forest industry, these new products 
were treated as durable products, such that one half of the output was calculated using the half-life 
and factors for sawn timber while those for wood panels were used for the other half. The applied 
method is based on the 2006 IPCC Guidelines and it is described in Finland’s inventory report (IPCC 
2006, Tilastokeskus 2019, Hamberg et al. 2016). 
 Appendix 3  10 
 
 
The national economy equilibrium model and source data 
The long-term energy and climate policy scenarios were assessed by means of a calculation model 
depicting Finland’s national economy. Under all of the scenarios, the economic description is based 
on estimated trends in key drivers of the global market and domestic economy. 
Assessment of impacts was based on a dynamic general equilibrium model known as FINAGE 
(formerly VATTAGE). This approach has already been used for a long time to estimate long-term 
economic development. The model describes economic development in terms of economic activities 
resulting from decisions made by economic players, including households, enterprises and the public 
sector. The FINAGE model’s scenarios and their interconnections extend both backwards and 
forwards in years. Historical scenarios make use of actual economic data from statistics and other 
such sources to identify economic trends and calibrate the calculation model so as to ensure its 
consistency with history. Future scenarios, in turn, are partially based on historical trends – including 
assumptions on developments in the parameters of productivity growth and global market changes, 
as well as certain predictable policy measures. Economic theory creates the frame of reference used 
in the model to interpret history, whereas historical economic trends and factors such as projected 
population growth form the framework within which economic players make their decisions. In 
general terms, such analysis also involves a macroeconomic projection used to match the near-term 
estimate of the development of the national balance of supply and demand with the estimate used by 
ministries to plan policies, for example. In terms of domestic economic policy, the scenarios also take 
account of measures with impacts extending into the next few decades. One of the most important of 
these is the pension reform, which will mitigate the otherwise looming labour shortage, especially in 
the 2020s. In addition, the assessment anticipates the impacts of the currently ongoing health and 
social services reform on labour demand and public finances. 
The scenarios produced using the FINAGE model assume that the drivers of economic development 
will evolve on a ‘business-as-usual’ basis, whereas the impact of various economic policy objectives 
or changes in the parameters of the global economy or technologies are assessed in alternative 
scenarios. This allows the impacts of the phenomena being considered to be isolated from the drivers 
of  economic  growth.  The scenarios  used  in  this  study  draw  in  many  respects  on  a  study  by 
Honkatukia, Kohl & Lehtomaa (2018), which gauged the drivers of Finland’s long-term economic 
growth. 
Integrated model analyses 
The quantitative analyses presented in this report were carried out in an integrated manner, which 
means that the aim was to harmonise input assumptions used in calculations as far as possible, while 
some of the results of one model analysis were used as baseline data for another. This resulted in 
quite a bulky modelling system, which was used to perform the quantitative analyses of carbon 
neutrality trajectories; moreover, the approach was iterative. A rough overview of the modelling 
system as a whole is provided below. 
The agricultural DREMFIA modelling process produces baseline data for calculating GHG emissions 
from agriculture as well as for TIMES-VTT modelling related to agricultural production volumes 
(cereals, livestock farming, biogas potential from agricultural side streams, required arable area). The 
TIMES-VTT modelling process, in turn, produces baseline data relevant to demand for industrial and 
energy wood, which is used as baseline data for MELA modelling to estimate domestic forest 
harvesting trends. The TIMES-VTT model also produces baseline data for FINAGE modelling of the 
national economy relating to the demand for and prices of energy commodities and needs to invest in 
the energy system, etc. The marginal cost calculated by the TIMES-VTT model for GHG emission 
 Appendix 3  11 
 
 
reductions is also included in the essential baseline data for FINAGE modelling. Both MELA and 
TIMES-VTT  calculations  provide  baseline  data  for  LULUCF  calculations.  MELA  produces 
harvesting levels and a forest development estimate. TIMES-VTT results are used to estimate land-
use developments from the perspective of the energy sector (peat production, wind power, etc.). The 
net balance between land-use GHG emission and removal trends produced by LULUCF calculations, 
in turn, functions as baseline data for TIMES-VTT modelling when determining the 2035 GHG 
emission target and the cost-optimal pathway towards this target. 
The schedule and resources assigned to the projects did not allow an in-depth iterative analysis, which 
would have involved running all of the modelling processes several times. Nevertheless, the TIMES-
VTT model calculations were performed twice and it was only during the second round that it was 
possible to specify the GHG emission target that would allow Finland to achieve carbon neutrality by 
2035. Furthermore, the FINAGE results were presented using the results of both TIMES-VTT 
calculation rounds as baseline data for economic calculations, such that one of the cases would not 
achieve  the  carbon  neutrality  target  while  the  other  one  would  (‘net-zero  calculation  case’). 
Conversely, LULUCF calculations were not updated with the ‘final’ TIMES-VTT baseline data and 
results, but their effects on the LULUCF sector’s GHG balance will in all likelihood be insignificant. 
 
References 
Aakkula, J., Asikainen, A., Kohl, J., Lehtonen, A, Lehtonen, A., Ollila, P., Regina, K., Salminen, O., Sievänen, R. & 
Tuomainen T. 2019. Maatalous- ja LULUCF-sektorien päästö- ja nielukehitys vuoteen 2050 [Development of 
emissions and sinks in the agricultural and LULUCF sectors until 2050]. Valtioneuvoston selvitys- ja 
tutkimustoiminnan julkaisusarja [Publications of the Government’s analysis, assessment and research activities] 
20/2019. 70 p. Available in Finnish (English abstract) at: http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-287-650-8. 
Haakana, M., Ollila, P., Regina, K., Riihimäki, H. & Tuomainen, T. 2015. Menetelmä maankäytön kehityksen 
ennustamiseen: Pinta-alojen kehitys ja kasvihuonekaasupäästöt vuoteen 2040 [Methodology for forecasting 
land use developments: Developments in surface areas and greenhouse gas emissions by 2040]. 
Luonnonvara- ja biotalouden tutkimus [Natural Resources and Bioeconomy Studies] 51/2015. 
Hamberg, L., Henttonen, H. & Tuomainen, T. 2016. Puusta valmistettujen tuotteiden hiilivaraston muutoksen laskenta 
kasvihuonekaasuinventaariossa – Menetelmäkehitys Suomen kasvihuonekaasuinventaarioon [Calculating 
change in the carbon stock of harvested wood products in the greenhouse gas inventory – Methods 
development for Finland’s Greenhouse Gas Inventory]. Luonnonvara- ja biotalouden tutkimus [Natural 
Resources and Bioeconomy Studies] 73/2016. Available in Finnish at: 
https://jukuri.luke.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/537716/luke-luobio_73_2016.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y. 
Hirvelä, H., Härkönen, K., Lempinen, R. & Salminen, O. 2017. MELA2016 Reference Manual. Natural resources and 
bioeconomy studies 7/2017. 547 p. ISBN 978-952-326-1 (Online). 
Honkatukia, J., Kohl, J. ja Lehtomaa, J. 2018. Uutta, vanhaa ja sinivalkoista – Suomi 2040 [Something old, something 
new – Finland 2040]. VTT Technology 327. Available in Finnish (English abstract) at: 
https://www.vtt.fi/inf/pdf/technology/2018/T327.pdf. 
IPCC 2006. 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Prepared by the National Greenhouse Gas 
Inventories Programme, Eggleston H.S., Buendia L., Miwa K., Ngara T. and Tanabe K. (eds.). Published: IGES, 
Japan. Available at: https://www.ipcc-nggip.iges.or.jp/public/2006gl/index.html. 
Koistinen, A., Luiro, J-P. & Vanhatalo, K. (eds.). 2016. Metsänhoidon suositukset energiapuun korjuuseen, työopas [Best 
Practices for Sustainable Forest Management: Energy wood harvesting, work guide book]. Tapion julkaisuja 
[Tapio publications]. Available in Finnish at: https://tapio.fi/wp-content/uploads/2015/06/MHS-Energiapuun-
korjuun-suositukset_verkkojulkaisu2.pdf. 
 Appendix 3  12 
 
 
Koljonen, T., Flyktman, M., Lehtilä, A., Pahkala, K., Peltola, E & Savolainen, I. 2009. The role of CCS and renewables in 
tackling climate change. Energy Procedia 1:4323–4330. 
Koljonen, T. & Lehtilä, A. 2015. Modelling Pathways to a Low Carbon Economy for Finland. In: Giannakidis G et al. 
(eds.). Informing Energy and Climate Policies Using Energy Systems Models, Lecture Notes in Energy, vol. 30. 
Springer, Cham. 
Kärkkäinen, L., Haakana, M., Heikkinen, J., Helin, J., Hirvelä, H., Jauhiainen, L., Laturi, J., Lehtonen, H., Lintunen, J., 
Niskanen, O., Ollila, P., Peltonen-Sainio, P., Regina, K., Salminen, O., Tuomainen, T., Uusivuori, J., Wall, A. & 
Packalen, T. 2019. Maankäyttösektorin toimien mahdollisuudet ilmastotavoitteiden saavuttamiseksi [Potential of 
land use measures in climate change mitigation]. Valtioneuvoston kanslia [Prime Minister’s Office]. 
Valtioneuvoston selvitys- ja tutkimustoiminnan julkaisusarja [Publications of the Government’s analysis, 
assessment and research activities] 67/2018. 75 p. Available in Finnish (English abstract) at: 
http://urn.fi/URN:ISBN:978-952-287-618-8. 
Lehtilä, A. 2019. Asiantuntija-arvio [Expert assessment]. VTT [VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland]. Email on 
28 October 2019. 
Lehtilä, Antti & Koljonen, Tiina. 2018. Pathways to Post-fossil Economy in a Well Below 2 °C World. In: Lect. Notes 
Energy, Vol. 64, George Giannakidis et al. (eds.). Limiting Global Warming to Well Below 2 °C: Energy System 
Modelling and Policy Development. 
Lehtonen, H. 2015. Evaluating adaptation and the production development of Finnish agriculture in climate and global 
change. Agricultural and Food Science 24: 219–234. 
Lehtonen, H. & Rankinen, K. 2015. Impacts of agri-environmental policy on land use and nitrogen leaching in Finland. 
Environmental Science and Policy 50: 130–144. doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2015.02.001. 
Lehtonen, H. & Niskanen, O. 2016. Promoting clover-grass: Implications for agricultural land use in Finland. Land Use 
Policy 59: 310–319. 
Lehtonen, H., & Niemi, J. 2018. Effects of reducing EU agricultural support payments on production and farm income in 
Finland. Agricultural and Food Science, 27(2), 124–137. 
Loulou R. 2008. ETSAP-TIAM: the TIMES integrated assessment model. Part II: Mathematical formulation. 
Computational Management Science, 5(1–2):41–66. 
Loulou R., Labriet M. 2008. ETSAP-TIAM: the TIMES integrated assessment model. Part I: Model structure. 
Computational Management Science 5(1–2): 7–40. 
Loulou R., Remme U., Kanudia A., Lehtilä A., Goldstein G. 2016. Documentation for the TIMES Model. Energy 
Technology Systems Analysis Programme (ETSAP). Available at: https://iea-
etsap.org/docs/Documentation_for_the_TIMES_Model-Part-I_July-2016.pdf. 
Mattinen, M. Heljo, J. & Savolahti, M. 2016. Rakennusten energiankulutuksen perusskenaario Suomessa 2015–2050 
[Baseline scenario for energy consumption of the building stock in Finland 2015–2050]. Suomen 
ympäristökeskuksen raportteja [Reports of the Finnish Environment Institute] 35/2016. 
Mikkonen, A. 2019. Suomen tuulivoimayhdistys [Finnish Wind Power Association]. Email on 30 October 2019. 
Niemi, P. 2019. Asiantuntija-arvio, tuulivoima-asiantuntija [Expert assessment, wind power expert]. Metsähallitus [Finnish 
Agency for Forests]. Email on 10 January 2019. 
Tilastokeskus [Statistics Finland]. 2015. Väestöennuste 2015–2065 [Population projection 2015–2065]. Suomen 
virallinen tilasto (SVT) [Official Statistics of Finland (OSF)]. 10 p. Available in English at: 
https://tilastokeskus.fi/til/vaenn/2015/vaenn_2015_2015-10-30_en.pdf. 
Tilastokeskus [Statistics Finland]. 2018. Energian hankinta ja kulutus [Energy supply and consumption]. Available in 
English at: https://www.stat.fi/til/ehk/index_en.html. 
 Appendix 3  13 
 
 
Tilastokeskus [Statistics Finland]. 2019. Greenhouse gas emissions in Finland 1990 to 2017. National inventory report 
under the UNFCCC and the Kyoto Protocol. 15 April 2019. Available at: 
http://www.stat.fi/static/media/uploads/tup/khkinv/fi_eu_nir_2017_2019-03-15.pdf. 
Tuominen, P., Klobut, K., Tolman, A., Adjei, A., De Best-Waldhober, M. 2012. Energy savings potential in buildings and 
overcoming market barriers in member states of the European Union. Energy and Buildings 51, pp. 48–55. 
Tuominen, P., Forsström, J., Honkatukia, J. 2013. Economic effects of energy efficiency improvements in the Finnish 
building stock. Energy Policy 52, pp. 181–189. 
Tuominen, P., Holopainen, R., Eskola, L., Jokisalo, J., Airaksinen, M. 2014. Calculation method and tool for assessing 
energy consumption in the building stock. Building and Environment 75, pp. 153–160. 
VMI [NFI]. Valtakunnan metsien 11. inventointi (VMI11) [11th National Forest Inventory (NFI11)]. 2013. Maastotyön ohjeet 
[Field instructions] 2013. Koko Suomi ml. Ahvenanmaa [All of Finland incl. Åland Islands]. Metsäntutkimuslaitos 
[Finnish Forest Research Institute]. Moniste [Handout]. 191 p. 
VMI [NFI]. Valtakunnan metsien 12. inventointi (VMI12) [12th National Forest Inventory (NFI12)]. 2017. Maastotyön ohjeet 
[Field instructions] 2017. Luonnonvarakeskus [Natural Resources Institute Finland]. Moniste [Handout]. 164 p. 
Äijälä, O., Koistinen, A., Sved, J., Vanhatalo, K., & Väisänen, P. (eds.) 2014. Metsänhoidon suositukset [Best Practices 
for Sustainable Forest Management]. Metsätalouden kehittämiskeskus Tapion julkaisuja [Publications of 
Forestry Development Centre Tapio]. Available in Finnish at: http://tapio.fi/wp-
content/uploads/2015/06/Metsanhoidon_suositukset_ver3_netti_1709141.pdf. 
 
 
 