CHARTING SINGAPORE’S   
LOW- CARBON AND   
CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREContents
Preface 1
Foreword 2
Overview 4
Chapter 1:  Global Context 17
Chapter 2: Singapore’s National Circumstances 22
Chapter 3: Singapore’s Long-Term Low-Emissions Aspiration 30
Chapter 4:  Key Long-Term Climate Actions 36
Chapter 5: Seizing Green Growth Opportunities 86
Chapter 6: Key Long-Term Adaptation Actions 104
Published by: 
National Climate Change Secretariat
Chapter 7:  Involving the Whole Nation 119
Strategy Group, Prime Minister’s Office
www.nccs.gov.sg
Chapter 8: Building International Partnerships  131
This document was prepared taking on board inputs and feedback  Conclusion 142
from relevant government agencies, academia, industry and 
civil society whose opinions and views were gathered through  Annex 144
technology roadmaps, surveys, the public consultation on 
Singapore’s long-term low-emissions development strategy  
and various stakeholder engagements.  
More details of the public consultation process can be found on  
http://www.nccs.gov.sg/public-consultation/feedback-from-public-
on-singapores-long-term-low-emissions-development-strategy/.
Copyright reserved 2020
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, 
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any 
means, electronic or mechanical, without the prior permission of 
the National Climate Change Secretariat. Preface
Climate change is a complex global challenge  Singapore’s LEDS builds upon our past 
that calls for concerted international action.  strategies and early actions. It outlines our 
All nations must work together to address the  long-term development priorities and climate 
challenges of climate change.  action policies and will serve as a reference 
point to inform our subsequent NDCs under 
Singapore recognises the urgent need for  the Paris Agreement. It aims to facilitate 
multilateral action and is committed to  long-term action to address the effects of 
doing our part as a responsible member of  climate change and to enable a well-managed 
the international community. Our National  transition to a low-carbon economy, while 
Climate Change Strategy document,  growing new sectors of our economy and 
Climate Change and Singapore: Challenges.  creating jobs and opportunities. 
Opportunities. Partnerships. published in 2012   
outlined Singapore’s plans to address climate  Our LEDS has been prepared by government 
change, followed by Climate Action Plan: Take  agencies under the Inter-Ministerial 
Action Today, for a Carbon Efficient Singapore in  Committee on Climate Change (IMCCC), in 
2016, which outlined our strategies to achieve  consultation with academia, industry and 
our first Nationally Determined Contribution  civil society whose opinions and expert 
(NDC). These documents set out the whole-of- views were gathered through technology 
nation approach we are adopting to address  roadmaps, surveys, and various stakeholder 
climate change, and detail the comprehensive  engagements. The involvement of multiple 
suite of actions that we are taking to reduce  parties in this planning process reflects our 
our carbon emissions.  intent to take a whole-of-nation, and whole-of-
society approach to address climate change. 
We have progressively and systematically 
implemented the strategies outlined in  To take into account new developments from 
these documents, but there is a need to do  emerging climate-friendly technological 
more in the face of the rising risks of climate  solutions and other prevailing conditions and 
impacts from a warming world. This document  developments at the international, regional 
hence outlines our long-term low-emissions  or domestic level, this document may be 
development strategy (LEDS), which aims  updated from time to time. 
to guide our transition to a low-carbon and 
climate resilient future. 
1 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREForeword Beyond 2030, our LEDS aspires to halve emissions from  Planning for a climate resilient future
its peak to 33 MtCO e by 2050, with a view to achieving 
2
net-zero emissions as soon as viable in the second half  For small island nations like Singapore, climate change 
of the century. Our enhanced 2030 NDC and LEDS  poses an asymmetrical challenge. On the one hand, 
build on policies and initiatives we have progressively  our impact on global emissions is small, but on the 
implemented over the years. They demonstrate our  other hand, the effect of climate change on us is 
Planning for a low-carbon future 
seriousness and commitment to support global climate  disproportionately large and existential. 
action and to work towards a low-carbon future.
This document represents an important next step in 
We are working to identify and assess climate change 
Singapore’s planning towards a low-carbon future. 
risks and impacts, and to formulate and implement 
By setting out our vision well in advance, we aim to 
There are three thrusts in our strategy.  adaptation plans to enhance our climate resilience and 
provide a clear sense of direction, to give ourselves and 
to minimise the adverse impacts of climate change on 
our stakeholders the time to effect a well-managed  First, we need to transform our 
the community, economy and our daily lives. Protecting 
Climate change is an existential challenge  transition to a low-carbon economy. This will also allow  industry, economy and society. Second, 
Singapore from sea level rise is a large-scale and long-
for Singapore us to grow new sectors in our economy, and create new 
we will have to draw on technologies, 
term effort requiring considerable resources, and is 
jobs and economic opportunities.
which are not yet mature such as  estimated to cost S$100 billion over the next 100 years. 
Across the globe, the effects of climate change are 
We have set up a new Coastal and Flood Protection 
clear and present. Extreme climate and weather  The development of our LEDS aspiration for 2050  carbon capture, utilisation and storage 
Fund, with an initial injection of S$5 billion, to start 
patterns have become more frequent, ice sheets are  and beyond is guided by a principled approach - it is 
(CCUS), and low-carbon fuels. Third, we 
setting aside the resources for this. We will implement 
melting and glaciers are receding. Singapore too has  Considered, Committed and Collective. 
will need international collaboration in 
our plans in phases, and be prepared to adjust and adapt 
experienced more episodes of unusually heavy rainfall 
areas such as well-functioning carbon  them as necessary to take into account the latest sea 
accompanied by flooding. As a low-lying island, we  Our climate policies and strategies are carefully 
level rise projections and engineering solutions.
remain fundamentally vulnerable. The ongoing effects  and thoroughly considered, taking into account  markets, carbon storage, and regional 
of climate change, particularly the threat of rising  the best available science and technology, and fully 
electricity grids. 
sea levels, mean that we will continue to face further  integrated with the larger context of challenges we  All must play a part
threats to our living environment and disruptions to  face in our national policy framework. We believe that 
the supply of food and resources.  the pursuit of economic growth can be compatible and  Each thrust will contribute to our aspiration of halving  A collective effort is required to realise our LEDS.  
mutually reinforcing with environmental objectives.  our emissions. We will pursue all three vigorously to  The Government, individuals, households and 
All countries must cooperate to achieve  This approach has allowed Singapore today to have  achieve this aspiration. The extent to which potential  businesses must work together in a whole-of-nation 
a low-carbon future one of the lowest carbon emissions per GDP dollar, or  emission reductions from each thrust can be realised  effort. We will also continue to work actively in 
emissions intensity. We ranked among the 20 best out  will become clearer in the coming years, as we gain  international forums to strengthen consensus among 
The adoption of the Paris Agreement in 2015 was a clear  of 141 countries in 2017.1  experience from implementing our programmes,  countries to tackle climate change, and collaborate 
response to the urgent call for global climate action.  as technology evolves, and as the modalities for  actively with international partners to build 
Given the diversity in the national circumstances of  Singapore is committed to play our part in  international collaboration become formalised. If  capabilities and share experiences. 
individual countries, as recognised in Article 4.19 of the  supporting global climate action. We are well on  the actual reductions that can be realised from each 
Paris Agreement, it is clear that there is no “one-size- track to achieve our 2009 Copenhagen pledge to  thrust are larger than we now assess, or are available  While Singapore’s efforts alone may be modest, our 
fits-all” approach for countries in the formulation of  reduce our emissions by 16% below our business-as- sooner, then we can realise our aspiration earlier. On  collective efforts with all nations can be substantial, 
their long-term low-emissions development strategies  usual (BAU) level in 2020. To build on these efforts, we  the other hand, if the potential reductions turn out to  and will help achieve the long-term temperature goal 
(LEDS). For example, small island states like Singapore,  have submitted an enhanced Nationally Determined  be less promising, we will still strive to meet our LEDS  of the Paris Agreement.
have different circumstances from countries with  Contribution (NDC) to peak our emissions at no higher  aspiration to the best of our ability even though the task 
a large land mass. Nonetheless, it is clear is that all  than 65 million tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent  would have become more difficult. 
countries need to do their utmost to reduce emissions  (MtCO e) around 2030. We have also expanded the 
2
and plan for the transition to a low-carbon future as  coverage of our pledge to include nitrogen trifluoride  We will do our utmost to press ahead on our LEDS  Teo Chee Hean
soon as possible. (NF ) within this same ceiling.  aspiration and strategies, and implement our 
3 Senior Minister 
commitments under the Paris Agreement in good faith  Chairman of the Inter-Ministerial Committee  
on the basis that other countries do likewise.  on Climate Change (IMCCC)
1  Source: International Energy Agency, CO Emissions from Fuel Combustion (2019).
2
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 2 3 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREOverview
Overview
Overcoming our   Singapore’s commitment  
geographical constraints to global climate action
Singapore’s approach to climate action  Singapore is well on track to achieve our 
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s 
and sustainability is constrained by our  2009 Copenhagen pledge to reduce our 
geography, which limits our ability to access  emissions by 16% below our business-as-
(IPCC) Special Report on Global Warming of 1.5oC 
renewable or alternative clean energy at  usual (BAU) level in 2020. 
highlights that human-induced warming has already  scale. We are a small and highly urbanised 
city-state with low wind speeds, relatively flat  In support of the Paris Agreement, we 
reached approximately 1oC above pre-industrial levels  land and lack of geothermal resources. As  committed in our Nationally Determined 
such, we have limited access to alternative  Contribution (NDC) to reduce our emissions 
in 2017. Multiple changes in the climate system have 
clean energy options such as geothermal,  intensity by 36% from 2005 levels by 2030, 
wind and tidal power. Nuclear energy  and to stabilise emissions with the aim of 
been observed, including increased intensity and 
production is not yet suitable for deployment  peaking around 2030. We are also on track to 
frequency of climate and weather extremes.  in Singapore. We are vigorously pursuing  achieve this commitment. We remain among 
solar energy production but due to our small  the 20 best-performing countries in terms 
size, high urban density and heavy cloud  of emissions intensity.2,3 Our greenhouse 
cover, we expect that this can meet about 4%  gas (GHG) emissions grew at a compounded 
of our current annual electricity needs and  annual growth rate (CAGR) of 1.8% from 2000 
A global solution is needed to address a global  increased international collaboration,   10% of current peak daily electricity demand. to 2017, compared to the growth of our GDP 
problem. Along with the rest of the global  to realise such an aspiration. at a CAGR of 5.2% in the same period.
community, Singapore will play our part to  These geographical constraints have driven 
reduce emissions in support of the long-term  At the same time, we will pursue active and  us to look into innovative and progressive  Our NDC was enhanced in 2020 to reflect 
temperature goal of the Paris Agreement.  systematic adaptation efforts. As a small  ways to pursue climate action. Long before  an absolute emissions limitation target, 
low-lying, island city-state, Singapore is  climate change became a global concern,  use of the latest IPCC methodologies, and 
Singapore had sought to balance economic  expanded coverage of gases to include 
We have put forth a long-term low- particularly vulnerable to the effects of 
growth with environmental protection in a  nitrogen trifluoride (NF ). Under our 
emissions development strategy  climate change. We face an existential threat  3
mutually reinforcing manner, and not one at  enhanced NDC, Singapore has committed 
from sea level rise and will increasingly 
(LEDS) that aspires to halve emissions 
the expense of the other.  to peak its absolute emissions at 65 million 
experience other climate impacts such 
from its peak to 33 MtCO e by 2050,  tonnes of carbon dioxide equivalent 
2 as increased temperature, prolonged dry 
For example, Singapore is a pioneer in  (MtCO e) around 2030. Constraining our 
with a view to achieving net-zero  2
spells, more intense rainfall, and exposure to 
establishing stringent vehicle control and use  total emissions within this absolute cap up to 
emissions as soon as viable in the  vector-borne diseases. Globally, there will be 
measures in cities. Since the early 2000s, we  2030 means that every sector in Singapore 
second half of the century.  greater pressures on resources, particularly 
have made a nation-wide switch to the use of  will need to put in significant effort to limit 
for water, energy, food and raw materials, 
natural gas for electricity generation instead  our emissions. We will need to do so in order 
This will require serious and concerted  most of which Singapore imports. We will  of more pollutive fuel oil. We also rigorously  to move towards a low-carbon nation in the 
efforts across our industry, economy and  need to continue to pursue innovative  pursued efforts in energy efficiency and  coming decade, with new commercial and 
society. We also need to rely on global  solutions to optimise our resources in a  conservation across our industry, economy  industrial enterprises, and new growth areas 
advances in low-carbon technology and on  carbon- and resource-constrained world. and society. such as the digital economy. 
2  Source: International Energy Agency, CO Emissions from Fuel Combustion (2019).
2
3  Emissions intensity refers to GHG emissions per dollar of GDP, measured in CO-equivalent per S$.
2
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 4 5 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREOverview
OVERVIEW OF SINGAPORE’S LEDS SINGAPORE’S LEDS IS BUILT ON THREE THRUSTS.
To transform our industry, economy, and society.
Beyond 2030, Singapore aims to significantly 
Our industry will need to make the necessary adjustments, capture 
reduce our emissions. Our LEDS aspires to 
new business opportunities and build up their competitive advantage 
halve emissions from its peak to 33 MtCO e  to be best-in-class in global energy and carbon efficiency. We will also 
2
promote energy efficiency and conservation in every sector, identify 
by 2050, with a view to achieving net-zero 
new growth opportunities, spur innovation and drive behavioural 
emissions as soon as viable in the second 
change to achieve these transformations;
half of the century. 
Harness emerging technologies as they mature. 
We are investing in research and development (R&D) to increase 
energy efficiency, harness renewable energy and decarbonise our 
grid, industries, and buildings. This includes emerging technologies 
currently still in the developmental phase, e.g. carbon capture, 
utilisation and storage (CCUS) and low-carbon hydrogen. Our ability 
to realise a low-carbon future will depend on the maturing of such 
emerging technologies; and
Pursue and leverage international collaborations
Singapore hosted the 2nd Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)  We will forge effective collaborations and partnerships with like-
Climate Change Partnership Conference in August 2019. This conference 
minded countries in areas such as carbon storage, energy imports 
provided a useful platform for ASEAN Member States and its dialogue partners 
to explore opportunities for climate action collaboration. via regional power grids and other innovative platforms, and leverage 
market-based mechanisms that support environmental integrity. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 6 7 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURECharting Singapore's Low-Carbon Future
MITIGATION
NDC
Transformations in Industry, Economy, Society
POWER  INDUSTRY TRANSPORT BUILDINGS HOUSEHOLDS WASTE & WATER
GENERATION
Energy efﬁciency Energy efﬁciency Zero private vehicle  80% green  Mandatory Energy Circular economy 
growth buildings by 2030 Labelling Scheme approach
At least 2 GWp of  System-level 
solar energy by 2030 solutions  9 in 10 peak period  Super Low Energy  Minimum Energy  Waste
journeys on “Walk-  Programme Performance 
Low-carbon  Low-carbon  Cycle-Ride” by 2040 Standards Recycling
technologies technologies Energy efﬁciency 
Cleaner vehicles Green Towns 
by 2040 Programme of desalination and  Long-Term 
Enhanced 2030  used water treatment
Low-Emissions 
Nationally 
CARBON TAX Initial rate of S$5/tCO e S$10-S$15/tCO e by 2030
2    2    Development 
Determined 
Strategy (LEDS)
Contribution (NDC)
Peak emissions at Halve emissions from 
65 its peak to
33
MtCO e
2
MtCO e
around 2030 2
Adoption of Advanced Low-Carbon Technologies
by 2050 &
e.g. Carbon capture, utilisation and storage, use of 
Based on current projections,  net zero 
low-carbon hydrogen
this will allow us to achieve a 
36% reduction in emissions 
intensity from 2005 levels emissions as soon as viable in 
by 2030. the second half of the century
Effective International Collaboration
e.g. International climate action, regional power grids, 
market-based mechanisms
ADAPTATION
Coastal Protection, 
Buildings & Infrastructure Network Infrastructure
Water Resources & Drainage
Keeping our buildings and  Keeping our essential services, 
Protecting our coastline from sea level rise
infrastructure safe including transport and network 
Ensuring water resilience, holistic stormwater 
infrastructure, running well
management, and ﬂood protection
Biodiversity & Greenery Public Health & Food Security Urban Heat Island (UHI) Effect
Strengthening resilience of our  Strengthening resilience in public  Mitigating the UHI effect to strengthen 
biodiversity and ecosystems health and our food supply our resilience in the face
of rising temperatures
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 8 9 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREOverview
Transformations of key sectors 
Power Sector  Industry Sector  Transport Sector  Building Sector  
       
Our key strategy for the power sector is to harness  For industries which draw on the electricity  Our transport policies address the urban  We are on schedule to green 80% of our 
the four supply “Switches”, namely: 1) Natural Gas;  grid to power their activities, the progressive  transport issue at its root, to reap the most gains  buildings by gross floor area (GFA) by 2030. 
2) Solar; 3) Regional Power Grids; and 4) Emerging  decarbonisation of our electricity grid will  in energy and carbon efficiency. As of March 2020, we have greened more 
Zero-Carbon Alternatives.  significantly reduce emissions.  than 40% of our buildings. 
Since 2018, we have capped private car and 
We are scaling up the deployment of solar energy,  Our industries produce not just for Singapore  motorcycle growth at zero. We have made major  We have developed the Super Low Energy 
including through innovative modes of deployment  but also for the global market. We will work  investments in public transport and active  (SLE) Building Programme, to encourage the 
such as floating, offshore, and building-integrated  with our industries so that they are among  mobility infrastructure, and now target for nine in  industry to achieve best-in-class building 
photovoltaics (BIPV). Our solar deployment target  the best-in-class in global energy and carbon  ten of all peak period journeys to be made using  energy performance in a cost-effective manner. 
has been raised from 350 megawatt-peak (MWp)  efficiency. We enhanced our grant schemes in  Walk-Cycle-Ride (WCR) transport modes by 2040.  To support the push towards more energy 
by 2020, to at least 2 gigawatt-peak (GWp) by  2019 to support companies to improve their  efficient buildings, we plan to raise the minimum 
2030. This will however meet only around 4% of  energy efficiency. We will also bring companies  We aim to phase out internal combustion engine  energy performance standards for all new and 
our current annual electricity needs and 10% of our  within a sector together to achieve systems-level  vehicles by 2040, and have all vehicles running  existing buildings undergoing major retrofitting 
current peak daily electricity needs.  efficiency gains across the sector.  on cleaner energy. All new public bus purchases  works. In addition, we will identify all buildings 
will be cleaner energy buses, including fully  in the annual publication of building energy 
To go significantly beyond this, we need technical  We are studying emerging technologies that  electric or hybrid models. To encourage take- performance data, to facilitate benchmarking 
breakthroughs, for example, to safely deploy highly  can help drive decarbonisation in industrial  up of cleaner vehicles, new electric vehicle (EV)  and spur building owners to undertake 
efficient solar panels on vertical building surfaces  processes. We will work with industry and our  purchases will receive rebates for a three-year  retrofitting measures to improve the energy 
that receive solar radiation for only part of the day.  research community to undertake R&D and  period from January 2021. We will also expand  efficiency of their buildings. 
Efforts such as energy storage solutions and solar  pilots to evaluate and improve their feasibility.  the public EV charging infrastructure significantly. 
forecasting are also being pursued to identify  For example, we have commissioned studies 
solutions to manage the intermittency challenge of  to evaluate the harnessing of CCUS and low- We will also green our major international 
solar photovoltaics (PV).  carbon hydrogen. transport facilities. Tuas Port, when completed by 
the 2040s, will consolidate Singapore’s container 
We are also exploring tapping on regional power  We will work closely with industry to make the  operations in a single automated terminal. This, 
grids, and studying emerging low or zero-carbon  necessary adjustments, capture new business  and the reduction in inter-haulage operations by 
alternatives such as solar-derived hydrogen.  opportunities, and build up their competitive  road and sea, will provide greater efficiency and 
advantage in this transition. We aspire to be  lower emissions. Changi Airport will continue to 
at the forefront of the global move towards  invest in environmental sustainability initiatives, 
environmentally sustainable production, and  such as energy efficiency improvements and 
seize the new opportunities this creates. electrification. The new Terminal 5 will be 
designed and built according to stringent energy 
efficiency standards, and is anticipated to achieve 
Green Mark Platinum standards. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 10 11 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREOverview
Transformations of key sectors 
Household Sector  Waste Sector Public sector to lead by example Cross-sectoral measures
To reduce energy consumption in the household  We launched our inaugural Zero Waste 
The Public Sector Taking the Lead in Environmental  Singapore is the first country in Southeast Asia  
sector, we have introduced Minimum Energy  Masterplan and enacted a Resource 
Sustainability (PSTLES) initiative aims to leverage  to put a price on carbon. The carbon tax came 
Performance Standards (MEPS) and a Mandatory  Sustainability Act (RSA) in 2019 to design waste 
the collective capabilities across the whole-of- into force in 2019 and applies uniformly to all 
Energy Labelling Scheme (MELS) for common  out of our economy. The aim is to develop a 
government to improve resource efficiency and  sectors, without exemption. The initial carbon tax 
household appliances. These standards are  circular economy, where materials are retained 
pursue environmental sustainability within the  rate (currently pegged at S$5/tCO e to provide 
2
reviewed regularly and will be raised over time to  and reused in the value chain as long as 
public service.  companies with a transitional period to improve their 
increase the adoption of more energy-efficient  possible. This will reduce our carbon footprint 
energy- and carbon-efficiency) will be reviewed by 
appliances. In addition, we have implemented  and complement our efforts to address climate 
The public sector is on track to achieve 15% energy  2023, with the intention to increase it to between 
incentives for households to switch to energy- change. We aim to reduce the amount of waste 
and 5% water savings by 2020 from 2013 levels and  S$10/tCO e and S$15/tCO e by 2030. The carbon 
2 2
efficient appliances and launched campaigns to  sent to landfill each day by 30% by 2030.
pursues green procurement practices (e.g. energy  tax covers around 80% of our total emissions, which 
increase public awareness on energy efficiency 
efficient electrical appliances, eco-labelled printing  is one of the highest carbon tax coverage globally, 
and conservation. 
papers). Public sector buildings have to achieve  and sends a fair, uniform and transparent price 
stringent Green Mark standards (e.g. new buildings  signal to incentivise emissions reduction. 
are required to attain Green Mark platinum). Public 
sector agencies will also segregate their food waste  To reduce emissions from hydrofluorocarbons 
for recycling and switch to equipment using low  (HFCs), which are GHGs with high GWP, we will 
Global Warming Potential (GWP)4 refrigerant ahead  mandate the recovery, reclamation and destruction 
of 2024 and 2022 national mandates respectively.  of spent refrigerants and roll out a package of HFC 
mitigation measures. A training and certification 
To promote solar adoption in Singapore, demand  scheme for technicians will be introduced to raise 
for solar deployment across public sector  the competencies of the refrigeration and air-
buildings and spaces is aggregated under the  conditioning (RAC) industry on the proper handling 
government’s SolarNova Programme. The Housing  of refrigerants during installation, maintenance 
& Development Board (HDB) targets to deploy 540  and decommissioning of RAC equipment. We will 
MWp of solar on the rooftops of public housing  also progressively phase out the supply of RAC 
blocks by 2030, which accounts for a significant  equipment that use HFCs with high GWP, starting 
proportion of our national solar deployment target  with commercial water-cooled chillers, household 
to achieve at least 2 GWp by 2030.  refrigerators and air-conditioners from 2022. 
We are reviewing PSTLES to develop programmes  
and measures for the next phase of the PSTLES 
initiative from 2021 to 2030, with more ambitious  
post-2020 targets.
4  GWP is a measure of the warming effect of a gas relative to the warming effect of an equivalent mass of CO, usually over a 100-year time horizon.
2
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 12 13 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREOverview
Promoting green growth Planning for a climate   Supporting international efforts
resilient future
Singapore aims to be a hub for green finance and  Singapore’s Climate Action Plan: A Climate-Resilient  We support the international climate action effort  The Centre for Climate Research Singapore (CCRS) 
facilitate more financial flows towards low-carbon  Singapore, For a Sustainable Future, outlines how  on multiple fronts. Principally, we work actively  is a key node for climate and weather research in 
sectors. Singapore’s Green Finance Action Plan,  climate change will affect us, and our strategy to  to support global climate action under the United  the Southeast Asia region. The ASEAN Specialised 
launched in November 2019, details our strategies  prepare for its effects. Our adaptation measures  Nations Framework Convention on Climate  Meteorological Centre launched a five-year 
to build financial system resilience to environmental  include: protecting our coasts and water supply;  Change (UNFCCC).  Regional Capability Building Programme in 2018, to 
risks, develop green finance solutions and markets,  alleviating floods; enhancing climate and ecological  improve regional capabilities to interpret climate 
and leverage innovation and technology. resilience; ensuring a healthy ecosystem of flora  Singapore is also working with the International  change scenarios to inform national climate change 
and fauna; caring for our coral reefs; strengthening  Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) and the  adaptation plans. 
We also launched a US$2 billion Green Investments  resilience in public health; strengthening food  International Maritime Organization (IMO) to 
Programme (GIP) in 2019 to anchor green activities  security; keeping cool in a warming world; and  reduce international carbon emissions from 
of asset managers in Singapore, and support the  keeping our buildings and infrastructure safe. the aviation and maritime transport sectors 
mainstreaming of green finance. As part of the GIP,  respectively. We are ready to participate in the 
the Government will allocate US$100 million to the  In particular, we are carefully studying the options  voluntary phase of the ICAO Carbon Offsetting 
Bank for International Settlements’ Green Bond  for protecting different parts of our coastline.  and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
Fund, in support of its global green initiatives.  These coastal protection plans may include a  (CORSIA), which will commence in 2021. We will 
combination of sea walls, tide gates, polders, as well  also develop a decarbonisation blueprint detailing 
The Government is collaborating with industries to  as nature-based solutions. Protecting Singapore  how Singapore, as a global maritime hub, can 
develop Environmental Risk Management guidelines,  from sea level rise is a large-scale and long-term  contribute to the maritime sector’s commitment 
which will be issued for public consultation in  effort requiring considerable resources, and is  to reduce emissions.
March 2020. These guidelines will set standards on  estimated to cost S$100 billion over the next 100 
governance, risk management and disclosure and  years. The Government has created a Coastal and  Under the Singapore Cooperation Programme 
encourage the right-pricing of loans and investments,  Flood Protection Fund, with an initial injection of  (SCP), we are sharing experiences, knowledge and 
to promote new green investments.  S$5 billion, to start setting aside the resources for  best practices in sustainable development with 
this. We will implement our plans in phases, and be  other developing countries. More than 130,000 
We also worked with fellow ASEAN countries to  prepared to adjust and adapt them according to the  government officials from over 170 countries have 
develop the ASEAN Green Bond Standards to  latest sea level rise projections. benefitted from such training programmes. In 
promote the development of a regional green  2018, we launched a Climate Action Package (CAP) 
bond market in line with international green  under the SCP aimed at supporting the efforts of 
bond principles. fellow developing countries, in particular, ASEAN 
Member States, Small Island Developing States 
We are also investing close to S$1 billion in research  (SIDS) and Least Developed Countries (LDCs), 
and development in areas such as new urban  towards achieving their climate pledges and 
mobility solutions and a next generation energy  building resilience. 
grid. As a “living laboratory”, we will continue to be 
available as a test-bed for innovative sustainability 
solutions that can be deployed globally. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 14 15 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREOverview Chapter 1     |     Global Context
Chapter 1
Everyone and every nation 
must play their part Global Context
Singapore will take climate action as one nation, 
through the collective action of government agencies, 
individuals, businesses, and the community. Our 
collective efforts, in both mitigation and adaptation, 
aim to ensure Singapore remains a vibrant and liveable 
city for current and future generations.
Climate science underscores the urgency 
for global emissions to be on track towards 
However, no country can solve this formidable challenge 
achieving the global temperature goal of the 
alone. Every country has to be part of a larger global 
Paris Agreement. 
vision to bring the world back on track towards achieving 
the long-term temperature goal of the Paris Agreement. 
The current climate pledges on the table are not 
This can only be possible through collective international 
on track to achieve the long-term temperature 
action and effective international partnerships.
goal and are likely to lead to a 3.2°C global 
warming scenario.5 As such, all countries must 
re-double their efforts to make their long-term 
transition to a low-carbon economy. 
5  Source: United Nations Environment  Programme, UNEP Emissions Gap Report 2019.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 16 17 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 1     |     Global Context
WHAT THE SCIENCE 
IS SAYING
More than 90% of climate scientists who publish studies  The reports also point out that many impacts will still 
on climate change agree that humans are causing recent  occur even with declining emissions, and that there would 
global warming.6 According to the World Meteorological  be limits to the effectiveness of adaptation measures. 
Organization (WMO), 2019 was the second warmest year  Worryingly, small island nations are particularly vulnerable, 
on record after 2016, with annual global mean temperature  and some are likely to become uninhabitable.
rising 1.1ºC above the pre-industrial average (1850-1900). 
The average temperatures for the last five-year (2015-2019)  According to the IPCC’s Special Report on the Global 
and ten-year (2010-2019) periods were also the highest on  Warming of 1.5ºC, global pathways consistent with 1.5°C 
record.7 This increase in temperatures has corresponded  warming will require urgent collective action, with rapid and 
with global averaged concentrations of CO  climbing to  far-reaching transitions in land, energy, industry, buildings, 
2
407.8 parts per million in 2018 and reaching a new record of  transport, and cities. According to the IPCC’s model 
410.9 parts per million in November 2019.8  pathways with no or limited overshoot of 1.5ºC, global net 
anthropogenic CO  emissions have to be reduced by 45% 
2
Under its sixth assessment cycle, the IPCC released a series  from 2010 levels by 2030 (40% to 60% interquartile range), 
of special reports on global warming and its impacts in 2018  and reach ‘net-zero’ around 2050 (2045-2055 interquartile 
and 2019.9 According to these reports, human activities  range). To limit warming to 2ºC, CO  emissions have to 
2
have been responsible for approximately 1.0ºC of global  decline by about 20% by 2030 in most pathways (10% to 
warming since pre-industrial times, and temperature rise  30% interquartile range) and reach net-zero around 2075 
Singapore hosted the Scoping Meeting of the Synthesis Report of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report  is likely to breach 1.5ºC between 2030 and 2052 at current  (2065-2080 interquartile range). 
(AR6) in October 2019. The meeting laid the foundation for the drafting of AR6, which will provide  rates of warming. More intense and frequent climate and 
policy makers with the most up-to-date scientific information related to climate change in 2022.
weather extremes have been observed. Warming from  These reports provide a strong scientific foundation that 
historical anthropogenic emissions since the pre-industrial  underscore the importance of the temperature goal of 
period will continue to drive long-term shifts in the climate  the Paris Agreement and the need to ensure that global 
system such as sea level rise. According to the Special  emissions are on track to achieve it.
Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate, 
under a “business-as-usual” (RCP8.5) scenario, global mean  It is clear that the global community must take urgent, 
sea level rise could increase to 1.1m by 2100, which is 10cm  concerted and sustained climate action to collectively bring 
above the most likely estimate from the Fifth Assessment  the world back to the path of climate safety.
Report released in 2014. This is due to a larger projected ice 
mass loss from the Antarctica ice sheet. 
6  Source: J. Cook, et al, "Consensus on consensus: a synthesis of consensus estimates on human-caused global warming," Environmental Research Letters Vol. 
11 No. 4, (13 April 2016); DOI:10.1088/1748-9326/11/4/048002
7  Source: WMO, Press Release: Greenhouse gas levels in atmosphere reach new record (20 November 2018).
8  Source: WMO, Press Release: 2019 concludes a decade of exceptional global heat and high-impact weather (3 December 2019).
9  IPCC’s Special Report on the Global Warming of 1.5ºC (released in October 2018), Special Report on Climate Change and Land (released August 2019), and  
Special Report on the Ocean and Cryosphere in a Changing Climate (released September 2019).
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 18 19 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 1     |     Global Context
A GLOBAL RESPONSE TO 
CLIMATE CHANGE IS NEEDED
The findings from climate science underscore the  The Paris Agreement puts in place a hybrid top-down/
need to continue driving the urgency and pace of  bottom-up mechanism whereby Parties’ NDCs are 
international negotiations on climate change. nationally determined and communicated or updated 
every five years, with a robust transparency and 
In December 2015, at the twenty-first session  reporting framework to track the progress of NDC 
of the Conference of the Parties (COP) to the  implementation and achievement, as well as an 
UNFCCC in Paris, all 196 Parties to the UNFCCC  ambition cycle to enhance NDCs over time. Successive 
adopted a landmark agreement to take the world  NDCs must represent a progression beyond previous 
in an ambitious new direction in terms of global  ones. A five-yearly Global Stocktake process, starting 
climate action.  in 2023, is aimed at reviewing collective progress on 
mitigation, adaptation, and means of implementation. 
The Paris Agreement sets out a long-term  This review process would then inform Parties’ 
temperature goal and underscores the urgency for  preparation of their next round of NDCs. 
Parties to play their part to enable global emissions 
to peak and decline as soon as possible. The Paris Agreement also invites Parties to formulate 
and communicate long-term low GHG emission 
development strategies, mindful of Article 2, taking 
into account their common but differentiated  At the request of the Chilean COP Presidency, Singapore and Spain co-facilitated the key 
Article 2.1(a) of the Paris Agreement sets out its long-term 
overarching conference decisions at COP-25, in December 2019, in Madrid. These were 
temperature goal to hold the increase in the global average  responsibilities and respective capabilities, in the light 
eventually adopted by the Parties. 
temperature to well below 2°C and pursue efforts to limit the  of different national circumstances. 
temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. 
Given the need for sustained climate action over 
Article 4.1 of the Paris Agreement recognises that in order to 
achieve the long-term temperature goal set out in Article 2,  the long-term, the onus is on all Parties to plan for 
Parties should aim to reach global peaking of greenhouse gas  their long-term transition to a low-carbon future in 
emissions as soon as possible, recognizing that peaking will 
support of the long-term temperature goal of the Paris 
take longer for developing country Parties, and to undertake 
Agreement. This will help provide a clear sense of 
rapid reductions thereafter in accordance with best available 
direction to the populace, industry and investors, and 
science, so as to achieve a balance between anthropogenic 
emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse  minimise any negative disruptions to the economy and 
gases in the second half of this century, on the basis of equity,  workforce. For the global community, it will provide 
and in the context of sustainable development and efforts to 
confidence that all Parties are moving forward in good 
eradicate poverty.
faith by playing their part towards achieving the long-
term temperature goal of the Paris Agreement.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 20 21 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 2     |     Singapore’s National Circumstances
NATIONAL  
Chapter 2
Population 
CIRCUMSTANCES
Singapore’s total population, including those  
on work passes in Singapore, stood at around  
Singapore's 
5.7 million as of 2019. Singapore’s small land area 
also means that our population density of 7,866 
people per km² is among the highest worldwide.
National 
Country profile Water supply 
Singapore has limited land to collect and store 
water, and is water-scarce despite being located 
Singapore is a small island-state in Southeast 
Circumstances in the equatorial rain belt and receiving abundant 
Asia with a total land area of about 725.7km², 
rainfall. Demand for water is expected to nearly 
consisting of one main island and more than  
double by 2060 in tandem with economic growth, 
60 small ones. Singapore is located 1 Degree 30 
while local catchment remains limited by available 
Minutes latitude north of the equator, situated 
land area. To ensure water sustainability, Singapore 
at the south of Peninsular Malaysia, and east of 
has developed a diversified and robust supply of 
Sumatra just across the Strait of Malacca. Much 
water through the “Four National Taps”, namely: 
of the island is less than 15m above the Singapore 
local catchment water, imported water, NEWater, 
Height Datum (SHD)10 and is generally flat. 
which is high-grade reclaimed water produced from 
Singapore’s national circumstances shape our approach 
treating used water, and desalinated water. 
to climate action.  Climate 
Singapore is situated near the equator and has a  Economy 
tropical climate, with relatively uniform temperature,  Singapore as an open and globalised economy 
Being a low-lying island-state, we are particularly 
abundant rainfall, and high humidity. The climate  produces goods and services that are consumed 
vulnerable to the impact of climate change. Our access 
of Singapore is characterised by two monsoon  globally. While Singapore’s share of global GDP 
to renewable energy at scale is greatly limited, which  seasons separated by inter-monsoonal periods.  is small at 0.4%, as an advanced manufacturing 
constrains our options in carbon abatement.  The Northeast Monsoon occurs from December  hub it plays a key role to meet the demands of 
to early March, and the Southwest Monsoon from  the region and the world, accounting for 2.1% 
June to September. The early part of the Northeast  of the world’s total merchandise exports.11 Our 
We will continue to build on a long-standing, 
Monsoon, in December and January, is the wetter  small domestic market has necessitated such an 
comprehensive national approach that seeks to achieve  period of the year when monsoon surges occur,  export-oriented economy. In 2019, Singapore’s 
sustainable growth alongside environmental protection  occasionally bringing prolonged heavy rain to  external merchandise trade amounted to around 
Singapore. In comparison, the Southwest Monsoon  S$1,022 billion, which is about two times the GDP 
This has allowed us to limit our growth in emissions and 
is drier. Afternoon thunderstorms are common  of Singapore. Singapore is also a major air and sea 
stay on track to achieve our international commitments, 
throughout the year, especially during the inter- transport hub given its geographical location at the 
notwithstanding our geographical constraints. monsoonal periods from late March to May and  crossroads of key international trade routes. 
October to November.
10  The SHD is defined as the mean sea level determined at Victoria Dock, Singapore, between 1935-1937.
11  Source: World Trade Organization, Trade Profiles – Singapore (2019)
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 22 23 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 2     |     Singapore’s National Circumstances
Alternative energy constraints
Singapore has limited land area, high urban  Hydroelectric power 
density, relatively flat land, low wind speeds  Hydroelectricity harnesses the energy of flowing 
and lack of geothermal resources. Therefore,  water for the generation of electricity. Much of 
harnessing alternative energy sources such as  Singapore is generally flat and less than 15m above 
hydroelectric, wind, geothermal or nuclear power  the mean sea level. 
is a major challenge. 
Marine (tidal and wave power) 
With a small land area and dense urban landscape,  Our tidal range (difference between high and low 
Singapore has to accommodate not only housing  tide) is about 1.7m, well below the 4m tidal range 
and commercial hubs, but also power plants,  that is typically required for commercial tidal 
reservoirs, air and seaports and industries all  power generation. The availability of wave power is 
within our city boundaries. Hence, competing  determined by the height and frequency of the waves, 
uses for land greatly limit our access to renewable  but the waters around Singapore are relatively calm 
energy at scale. These difficulties in transitioning  as we are sheltered by land masses around us. 
to alternative energy sources are recognised in 
Article 4.10 of the UNFCCC.12 Nuclear
Singapore conducted a pre-feasibility study (Pre-FS) 
on nuclear energy as an option to meet Singapore’s 
long-term energy needs. The study concluded in 2012 
Biomass  that nuclear energy technologies presently available 
Singapore’s economic structure by nominal value added share (2019)
Biomass, which is used by many countries with  are not yet suitable for deployment in Singapore. 
available land mass as a fossil fuel alternative, is not 
viable as a significant energy resource. Singapore  Since the conclusion of the Pre-FS, we have been 
already converts much of our waste to energy,  monitoring the development of safer nuclear energy 
providing about 2.3% of our current electricity  technologies. Newer nuclear power plant designs that 
needs. Nonetheless, we will continue to monitor  are being developed and tested have the potential 
developments in this area to keep abreast of  to be much safer than many of the plants that are 
Climate vulnerabilities
progress in biomass. in operation today. However, the risks to Singapore, 
given that we are a small and densely populated 
Fundamentally, climate change poses an asymmetrical and existential challenge to small 
Geothermal  city, still outweigh the benefits at this point. Most of 
island nations like Singapore. Although our impact on global emissions is small, the effect 
Geothermal energy is not commercially viable in  these newer technologies are still at the testing phase 
of climate change is disproportionately large on us as a low-lying island nation. 
Singapore given the lack of conventional geothermal  and have not been operationally proven. As we are 
resources and our small land area. Unconventional  planning for the long term and not for our immediate 
Singapore’s vulnerabilities to the impacts of climate change will require the Government 
geothermal resources are unable to be utilised in a  energy needs, we will continue to monitor the 
to pursue a comprehensive adaptation programme to protect our coasts, low-lying areas 
cost-effective manner with current technologies. progress of these nuclear energy technologies 
and communities (see Chapter 6 for details of Singapore’s adaptation vulnerabilities and 
strategies). These adaptation actions will impose significant fiscal costs for the Government.
12  Article 4.10 of the UNFCCC states that Parties shall, in accordance with Article 10, take into consideration in the implementation of the commitments of the 
Convention the situation of Parties, particularly developing country Parties, with economies that are vulnerable to the adverse effects of the implementation of 
measures to respond to climate change. This applies notably to Parties with economies that are highly dependent on income generated from the production, 
processing and export, and/or consumption of fossil fuels and associated energy-intensive products and/or the use of fossil fuels for which such Parties have 
serious difficulties in switching to alternatives.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 24 25 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 2     |     Singapore’s National Circumstances
Dependency on imports Pursuit of sustainable 
development 
As one of the most globalised economies and  Singapore has always placed a high priority 
a trading nation with no indigenous resources,  on environmental issues and has pursued the 
Singapore is heavily dependent on the global  concurrent goals of growing the economy and 
supply chain for our food and energy. Singapore’s  protecting the environment. We regard these 
economic activity and emissions are also highly  goals as mutually reinforcing. Our pursuit of 
sensitive to the volatility of regional and global  sustainability and environmental protection is 
developments. These challenges mean that  reflected in our approach to urban development 
Singapore’s climate strategies have to take into  and resource management, including how 
account international developments that may  we manage transportation, housing, waste, 
negatively affect our economy, and our food and  greenery, energy and water. Details on our 
energy security. sustainability journey are provided in Chapter 3.
Located along the Straits of Johor, Sunseap’s 5 MWp solar farm is one of the largest 
offshore floating system in the world. The amount of solar energy generated will reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions by about 2,600 tonnes a year.
to keep our energy options open for the future. We  framework and streamlining of compliance 
will also continue to strengthen our capabilities to  requirements. The SolarNova Programme also 
understand nuclear science and technology. aggregates demand for solar deployment across 
public sector buildings and spaces, and hence 
Wind  generates demand to catalyse the growth of 
Harnessing wind energy is also not viable, given our  solar energy in Singapore and to support the 
low average wind speeds between 2m/s and 3m/s  solar industry in developing its capabilities. In 
and lack of land for large-scale application of wind  addition, the Government is actively investing in 
turbines. Most commercial wind farms leverage  R&D and test-bedding to improve the efficiencies 
average wind speeds of at least 4.5m/s, while prime  and lower the costs of solar PV and related 
wind sites require annual average wind speeds in  technologies. 
excess of 7.5m/s. In addition, there are challenges 
to harnessing offshore winds due to busy maritime  Efforts are also being pursued to identify 
traffic in our waters.  solutions to manage the intermittency challenge 
of solar PV, which if left unaddressed would 
Solar limit solar deployment. For example, we are 
Despite Singapore’s space constraints, the  studying how energy storage solutions and solar 
Government is pressing ahead to promote solar  forecasting can be used in Singapore’s context to 
By pursuing sustainable development, we can ensure a liveable environment for future generations.
photovoltaic (PV) deployment, with solar energy  manage intermittency. By 2030, we aim to deploy 
being our most viable renewable energy source.  at least 2 GWp of solar energy.
Efforts include enhancement of the regulatory 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 26 27 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 2     |     Singapore's National Circumstances
EMISSIONS  
Historical time series
120.0 Emission GDP (Billion) in 500
MtCO eq Chained (2015) Dollars
2
110.0
PROFILE From 2000 to 2017, Singapore’s economy grew at a  450
compounded annual growth rate (CAGR) of 5.2%,  100.0
400
while real GDP levels (in chained (2015) dollars) 
90.0
Stinoinc Srg$eaa4ps5oe6rd.e1 ’b4sy  Gb 1iHl3liG6o%n e  mifnr oi2sms0i1o S7n$. sI1n g9 tr3he.1we3 s  abatmi lali eos lnpo ewinrei 2or 0dra,0 t0e   80.0 G D P : C A G R o f 5.2 % 335000
70.0
with a CAGR of 1.8%, and an increase of 34.8% (13.4 
MtCO e) from 2000 to 2017. 60.0 350
2
50.0 GHG Emission: CAGR of 1.8% 200
Overview of historical emissions Overall, emissions intensity improved by 43% while 
40.0
energy intensity improved by 39% from 2000 to 
150
2017. Some of the key policy initiatives implemented  30.0
Singapore’s GHG emissions in 2017 totalled 
during this period include a switch in fuel mix from  100
52.0 MtCO e. The figure below shows the share 
2 20.0
fuel oil to natural gas, which is a cleaner fuel source, 
of direct emissions per sector, as well as the 
as well as various schemes promoting energy  10.0 50
breakdown of indirect emissions from each 
efficiency. These included the Green Mark Scheme 
sector’s electricity usage. 0.0 0
as a benchmarking standard to encourage the  2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
development of environmentally friendly buildings  Time series of Singapore’s GHG emissions
and energy efficiency grants to encourage industries 
to integrate resource and energy efficiencies into 
their facility operations. 
Energy Intensity  Emissions Intensity 
toe/S$m GDP tCOe/S$m GDP
2
100.0 220
Emission Profile (2017)
90.0 200
Total Emission: ~52MtCO e
2
80.0 180
WASTE AND WATER
HOUSEHOLD 70.0 160
PRIMARY EMISSION  BUILDINGS INDUSTRY SECONDARY EMISSION 
60.0 140
POWER 39.0% INDUSTRY 14.0%
INDUSTRY 46.0% TRANSPORT TRANSPORT 2.3% 50.0 120
TRANSPORT 12.9% BUILDINGS 13.8%
TRANSPORT
BUILDINGS 0.8% HOUSEHOLD  6.2% 40.0 100
HOUSEHOLD 0.4% WASTE AND WATER 0.8%
WASTE AND WATER 0.7% POWER BUILDINGS OTHERS 1.9% 30.0 80
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017
Energy  Intensity (toe/S$m GDP) Emission  Intensity (tCOe/S$m GDP)
2
INDUSTRY
Time series of Singapore’s energy and emissions intensity
HOUSEHOLD
WASTE AND WATER
OTHERS
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 28 29 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 3     |     Singapore's Long-Term Low-Emissions Aspiration
Chapter 3
Since our independence in 1965, long before climate change 
became a global issue, Singapore has taken progressive 
steps to pursue the twin goals of growing the economy and 
protecting the environment. Our goal is sustainable growth – 
Singapore's 
to pursue economic and environmental objectives together,  
not one at the expense of the other, or either at all costs. 
Long-Term
Timeline of Singapore’s sustainable development journey
Low-Emissions 
   1970       2010   
Aspiration
Established Anti-Pollution Unit under   Communicated 2020 climate pledge in 
the Prime Minister’s Office to tackle   support of the Copenhagen Accord to  
air pollution. the UNFCCC.
   1972       2012   
Established Ministry of the Environment  Publication of Climate Change & 
following the UN Conference on the  Singapore: Challenges. Opportunities. 
Human Environment in Stockholm. Partnerships on Singapore’s strategy  
and plans to address climate change.
   1992   
   2015   
Adoption of the UNFCCC at the 
1992 United Nations Conference on  Adoption of the Paris Agreement at the 
Environment and Development, where  21st Session of the Conference of the 
Singapore has always sought to develop sustainably.  Singapore’s Ambassador-at-Large  Parties to the UNFCCC. We also submitted 
Tommy Koh played a key role in drafting  Singapore’s NDC to the UNFCCC.
Long-term integrated planning is at the heart of 
the Framework Convention. We also 
   2016   
Singapore’s economic and environmental management.
issued the first Singapore Green Plan for 
Publication of Climate Action Plan:  
environmental sustainability. 
Take Action Today, For a Carbon-Efficient 
   2009   
Singapore’s LEDS aims to provide a clear sense 
Singapore on Singapore’s mitigation 
of direction and keep us competitive in a carbon- Publication of first Sustainable Singapore  strategies to achieve our NDC.
Blueprint on Singapore’s sustainable 
   2020    
constrained world.
development targets up to 2030.
Communicated LEDS and enhanced  
NDC to the UNFCCC. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 30 31 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 3     |     Singapore’s Long-Term Low-Emissions Aspiration
Charting the way forward towards a low-carbon future
There is a need to do even more in the face of the rising risks of climate impacts from 
a warming world. 
We therefore undertook a considered approach to develop our LEDS to guide our 
transition to a low-carbon, sustainable and climate resilient future. This document 
aims to facilitate action over successive generations to address the effects of climate 
change, and to help us to effect a well-managed transition to a low-carbon economy, 
while growing new sectors of our economy, and creating jobs and opportunities in a 
sustainable way. It will also serve as a reference point for informing our subsequent 
NDCs under the Paris Agreement.
Methodology
Singapore’s Minister for Foreign Affairs Dr Vivian Balakrishnan with then-People’s Republic of China Special 
Envoy for Climate Change Xie Zhenhua and then-United States Special Envoy for Climate Change Todd Stern 
The development of Singapore’s LEDS  identify the mitigation actions through  
celebrating the successful adoption of the Paris Agreement at COP-21 in Paris in December 2015. 
was overseen by the Inter-Ministerial  a combination of top-down and bottom- 
Committee on Climate Change (IMCCC),14  up analysis. 
which is chaired by Senior Minister Teo 
Chee Hean and supported by the National  A whole-of-government/nation approach 
Singapore is a clean and green garden city  vehicle ownership and usage, and to  Climate Change Secretariat (NCCS), the  driven by the IMCCC was taken to develop 
today due to decades of sustained effort  encourage energy efficiency and conservation  national coordinating agency for climate  possible climate measures for our LEDS. 
and conscious decisions to implement  across all the sectors. change issues under the Strategy Group, 
environmentally friendly measures as part of  Prime Minister’s Office.  The approach taken for our LEDS was to 
our development efforts.  We strive for our industries to be as carbon- ensure that it was fully integrated within 
efficient as possible. This approach has allowed  Under the IMCCC, the Long-Term  the larger context of our national policy 
For instance, since the early 2000s, we have  Singapore’s emissions intensity today to be one  Emissions and Mitigation Working Group  framework, and to take into account our 
been replacing fuel oil with natural gas – the  of the lowest in the world. We ranked among  (LWG) is responsible for envisioning  national circumstances, the best available 
cleanest form of fossil fuel – as the primary fuel  the 20 best-performing out of 141 countries  Singapore’s post-2020 future in a carbon- science and technology, and consultations 
for electricity generation. In 2019, natural gas  in terms of emissions intensity in 2017. We are  constrained world. The LWG provides  with key stakeholders, towards developing 
accounted for around 95% of our electricity  recognised as Asia’s most sustainable city and  the planning framework for government  a suite of effective and practical strategies.
generation. We also price energy at market  fourth most sustainable city globally according  agencies to work together to discuss and 
cost, without any subsidy, to reflect resource  to the 2018 Sustainability Cities Index.
scarcity and promote judicious usage. We also 
maintain stringent measures to discourage 
13  Source: International Energy Agency, CO Emissions from Fuel Combustion (2019). 14  Details on the organisation of the IMCCC can be found in the Annex. 
2
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 32 33 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 3     |     Singapore’s Long-Term Low-Emissions Aspiration
LEDS aspiration
Some of the key questions that were   A recursive-dynamic numerical model, MARKAL,15  Having taken into account Singapore’s national  Each thrust will contribute to our aspiration of 
considered include: was used to simulate possible mitigation pathways,  circumstances, the urgency of global climate  halving our emissions. We will pursue all three 
based on the possible technology options  action, inputs from the above processes, and  vigorously to achieve this aspiration. The extent 
available to Singapore in light of our national  building on our NDC (which aims to peak our  to which potential emission reductions from 
What is the long-term mitigation potential for 
circumstances. Technology roadmaps, prepared  emissions at 65 MtCO e around 2030), we set  each thrust can be realised will become clearer 
2
a small island city-state with limited access to  by the Government in collaboration with industry  out our long-term low-emissions aspiration to  in the coming years, as we gain experience from 
alternative energy sources?  stakeholders, academic experts, and technical  guide our future efforts. implementing our programmes, as technology 
consultants, served as inputs for estimating  evolves, and as the modalities for international 
the long-term mitigation potential of future  We have put forth a long-term low-emissions  collaboration become formalised. If the actual 
How can Singapore achieve energy security 
technologies in Singapore.16 development strategy (LEDS) that aspires to  reductions that can be realised from each thrust 
and environmental sustainability?
halve emissions from its peak to 33 MtCO e  are larger than we now assess, or are available 
  2
The Government also undertook an extensive  by 2050, with a view to achieving net-zero  sooner, then we can realise our aspiration earlier. 
What are the key technological  
public consultation between July and September  emissions as soon as viable in the second half  On the other hand, if the potential reductions 
solutions necessary to lower Singapore’s 
2019 on potential long-term low-emissions  of the century. This will require serious and  turn out to be less promising, we will still strive 
long-term emissions to align with the global  strategies for Singapore.17 The public consultation  concerted efforts across our industry, economy  to meet our LEDS aspiration to the best of our 
temperature goals of the Paris Agreement? was aimed at seeking views on measures and  and society. We also need to rely on global  ability even though the task would have become 
actions that could be taken by the government,  advances in low-carbon technology and on  more difficult. 
businesses, households and individuals towards  increased international collaboration, to realise 
A rigorous modelling exercise was conducted under 
becoming a low-carbon global city-state. About  such an aspiration.
the supervision of the LWG to develop the key 
2,000 responses18 from the public, various non-
mitigation strategies and low-emissions pathways 
governmental organisations (NGOs), green 
There are three thrusts in our strategy. 
for Singapore. Relevant government agencies 
groups, green councils, academics, non-
worked together to iteratively evaluate possible  First, we need to transform our industry, 
profit organisations, companies and business 
mitigation measures in terms of cost effectiveness  economy and society. Second, we will 
organisations were received. Several engagement 
and practicability, taking into account the  have to draw on technologies, which are 
sessions were organised from August 2019 to 
objectives of the Paris Agreement temperature goal. 
January 2020 to facilitate in-depth discussions with  not yet mature such as carbon capture, 
experts and stakeholders across a wide variety  utilisation and storage (CCUS), and 
Various research institutes in Singapore were 
of sectors, which include the transport, industry,  low-carbon fuels. Third, we will need 
also engaged to study the technologies and 
buildings, infocomm and logistics sectors.
international collaboration in areas such as 
mitigation measures possible for Singapore, as 
well-functioning carbon markets, carbon 
well as the long-term abatement potential and 
costs of these options.  storage, and regional electricity grids. 
15  MARKAL (MARKet Allocation) is a widely used recursive-dynamic numerical model for economic analysis of various energy-related systems over a period of 
several decades.
16  The technology roadmaps can be downloaded at http://www.nccs.gov.sg/media/technology-roadmaps.
17  The public consultation document can be downloaded at https://www.nccs.gov.sg/docs/default-source/default-document-library/2050-public-consultation-
document-(for-publication)_(revised-151019).pdf
18  A summary of the responses to the public consultation process can be downloaded at www.nccs.gov.sg/public-consultation/response-to-feedback-on-
singapore’s-long-term-low-emissions-development-strategy/
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 34 35 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
POWER
Chapter 4
Current landscape
Key Long-Term  
As of 2017, emissions from power generation  Decarbonising the power grid is an essential 
represented around 39% of Singapore’s  component of Singapore’s long-term emissions 
Climate Actions
national emissions. While Singapore’s electricity  reduction aspiration. A cleaner power grid would 
consumption grew by almost 40% from 2005  mean cleaner electricity for all sectors, and would 
to 2017, our Grid Emission Factor (GEF) has  support the push for greater electrification in 
improved from 0.5255 tCO /MWh in 2005 to  sectors such as transport. Singapore is committed 
2
0.4188 tCO /MWh in 2019. This is largely due to  to transforming our power sector and significantly 
2
our switch to natural gas, which accounts for more  reducing its emissions. We will pursue these goals 
than 95% of Singapore’s fuel mix in 2019. Beyond  through the use of cleaner energy sources and 
natural gas, Singapore’s solar capacity has also  technology efficiency improvements.
increased significantly over the years. We are well 
on track to achieve 350 MWp in 2020, and aim to 
achieve at least 2 GWp by 2030.
To realise our LEDS aspiration, we need 
transformations in industry, economy, and 
Electricity Generation Fuel Mix
society. We will need to draw on emerging 
technologies that are not yet mature, such as 
100%
carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) 
and low-carbon fuels. We will also need to  80%
leverage international collaboration in areas 
60%
such as well-functioning carbon markets and 
regional energy grids. Singapore will pursue 
40%
these thrusts through implementing policies 
20%
and frameworks to maximise the potential 
emission reductions from all sectors.
0%
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019*
Others Coal Petroleum Products Natural Gas *Data for 2019 is as of Q1 2019.
Singapore’s electricity generation fuel mix
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 36 37 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Grid Emission Factor Singapore’s future electricity grid 
We will press on in our efforts to ensure a sustainable, reliable and affordable energy supply. 
Our vision for a sustainable energy future not only builds on past and existing efforts, but also 
Average Operating Margin (OM) (kg CO2/kWh) considers future possibilities that could enable our electricity grid to be significantly decarbonised. 
0.50 We will harness the four supply switches of “Natural Gas”, “Solar”, “Regional Power Grids”, and 
“Emerging Low-Carbon Alternatives”, together with greater energy efficiency to accelerate our 
energy transformation.
0.48
0.46
0.44
0.42
0.40
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Time series of Singapore’s Grid Emission Factor 19
19  The Grid Emission Factor (GEF) measures average CO emissions per Megawatt-hour (MWh) of electricity generated. The Operating Margin (OM) GEF 
2
measures all generating power plants’ generation-weighted average CO emissions per unit net electricity generation in the system. The Build Margin 
2
(BM) emission factor refers to the most recently-built power units’ generation-weighted average CO emissions per unit net electricity generation. With the 
2
introduction of new and more efficient combined cycle gas turbines, Singapore’s BM emission factor trends lower than the OM emission factor. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 38 39 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Developing the Four Switches will be key to 
overcoming Singapore’s energy challenges.
1st Switch − Natural gas Generate power from natural gas more     2nd Switch – Solar
SolarNova Programme
efficiently to reduce emissions
The SolarNova Programme, which aggregates 
As it takes time to shift away from conventional fossil  As technology improves, power generation systems    Solar energy remains the most viable renewable 
demand for solar deployment across public sector 
fuel power generation, and to develop and scale up  are expected to become more efficient over time.  energy option for Singapore. In recent years, solar 
buildings and spaces, catalyses the growth of solar 
alternative energy options, natural gas will continue  This will enable further carbon emissions reductions,  installed capacity has exponentially increased. 
energy in Singapore. Four leasing tenders totalling 
to be the dominant fuel for Singapore in the near  improve cost competitiveness and ensure more  The Government is taking the following active 
236 MWp have been awarded since 2015, with a fifth 
future. We will continue to explore ways to reduce  efficient use of natural gas.  steps to support greater solar adoption:
tender to be awarded in 2020 for 60 MWp of solar 
emissions from the combustion of natural gas for 
energy. The SolarNova programme remains the 
power generation, and ensure that our energy supply  Singapore will continue to encourage the power  •  Streamlining regulations to make it 
largest driver of solar adoption across the whole-of-
remains resilient for the future.  generation companies to upgrade their systems  easier for solar players to sell excess 
government and Singapore.
and technologies to improve the efficiency of power  solar electricity to the grid;
generation. We launched the Energy Efficiency Grant 
Call to encourage power generation companies to  •  Aggregating public sector demand for 
invest in energy-efficient equipment or technologies to  solar photovoltaics (PV) through the 
reduce their carbon emissions. We will also encourage  SolarNova programme;
the deployment of more advanced and efficient gas 
turbines, as existing gas turbines are retired. •  Enhancing capabilities in forecasting 
solar power output to mitigate the effects 
Diversify our natural gas sources to   of solar intermittency. For example, we 
improve energy security awarded a research grant to develop an 
accurate multi-timescale solar forecasting 
To ensure a more resilient supply of natural gas,  solution customised to Singapore’s 
Singapore built a liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal,  tropical weather conditions; and
which began operations in 2013. Our LNG terminal 
allows us to source for natural gas globally, in addition  •  Deploying solar panels on spaces such 
to our piped natural gas (PNG) supply. We will continue  as reservoirs besides building rooftops, 
to diversify Singapore’s gas supplies.  to overcome our land constraints. 
Solar panels deployed on Housing & Development Board 
Singapore intends to appoint up to two new  (HDB) roofs as part of the SolarNova Programme
LNG importers. The Government has also issued 
an Expression-of-Interest to identify potential 
technologies, business models, and sites for 
deployment of an offshore LNG terminal when needed.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 40 41 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Facilitating greater solar deployment  Mitigating the variability of solar power Underground ESS deployment at  
Marina Bay District Cooling
Singapore aims to deploy at least 2 GWp of solar  Local solar energy output is intermittent due to our  Presently, the relatively higher cost of ESS makes 
by 2030, which will meet around 4% of our current  tropical weather conditions, such as monsoon winds  commercial viability challenging. However, the  Under the Smart Grid 2.0 Grant Call in 2015, the 
annual electricity needs and 10% of current peak  and cloud cover, which impact the variability of solar  costs of ESS are falling. The Government is working  Government awarded a project to design and 
daily electricity demand. This is equivalent to  generated power. Possible measures to address the  with industry players to implement test-beds, build  implement a novel hybrid ESS, combining a 400 
meeting the annual electricity needs of around  variability of solar power include: i) enhancing solar  local capabilities and develop technical standards  kilowatt (kW) lithium-ion battery with thermal 
350,000 households in Singapore. To meet this  forecasting systems; ii) reducing the dispatch interval  to safely deploy ESS in Singapore's hot and humid  storage. The development of this innovative 
ambitious target, we will drive solar deployment  for electricity generation and regulation reserves;  environment. We will establish a set of deployment  project allows the district cooling network to 
beyond the rooftops of public sector buildings, to  and iii) enabling energy storage systems (ESS),  guidelines to maximise space, co-locate ESS with  participate in the Energy Market Authority’s 
include private sector buildings in partnership with  flexible conventional generation, demand response  other infrastructure safely and bootstrap the  (EMA) ancillary services initiatives (e.g. demand 
private developers and industry players. We will  management, regional grid integration and vehicle- deployment of ESS solutions. As Singapore pushes  response programme). This project was awarded 
also explore innovative deployment possibilities  to-grid (V2G) systems.  for greater solar deployment, we have set an ESS  the Merit Award under the Minister for National 
on vertical and horizontal surfaces. To overcome  deployment target to be able to deliver 200 MW  Development’s R&D Awards in 2019. 
Singapore’s land constraints, we will also explore  In 2018, the Government awarded a research grant  beyond 2025.
the deployment of floating solar modules on our  to a consortium led by the National University   
reservoirs and offshore sea space. of Singapore (NUS) to develop a solar irradiance  Separately, with Singapore's push to introduce 
forecasting model customised to Singapore’s  more electric vehicles (EVs), V2G technology will 
Improvements in solar cell efficiency will also  tropical weather conditions. Further studies could  potentially allow us to treat each EV as an off-grid 
allow us to increase the amount of solar-powered  help determine how to address the impact of solar  energy storage device. As such, EVs can help to 
electricity. Currently, conventional solar panel  intermittency in the most cost-effective manner  stabilise grids by providing ancillary services such as 
efficiency is between 15% and 20%. As cell  through accurate solar forecasting and matching with  frequency regulation and peakload shaving. 
efficiencies improve, the amount of energy  the dispatch interval, whilst minimising the need for 
generated will correspondingly increase.  other costlier measures such as energy storage. 
Underground ESS deployment for district cooling at 
Marina Bay area
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 42 43 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
INDUSTRY
3rd Switch –  4th Switch –  Current landscape Improving industrial  
Regional power grids Emerging low-carbon alternatives energy efficiency 
The industry sector is a key engine of Singapore’s 
Singapore is exploring ways to tap on regional  Singapore is carrying out research into adopting  economic growth. Our industries produce not only  The implementation of energy efficiency projects 
power grids to access energy that is cost  several promising low-carbon technologies,  for Singapore but also to meet the needs of the  and good energy management practices can 
competitive and meets our climate change  including CCUS and low-carbon hydrogen. These  global market. Today, the industry sector contributes  help companies save energy, reduce operational 
obligations, while ensuring continued energy  technologies could allow us to significantly  to 20.9% of our GDP, provides employment for  costs and increase business competitiveness. 
security. These include new bilateral power  decarbonise the power sector, as well as other  12.9% of our workforce and has strong linkages  Over the years, Singapore has implemented 
trading arrangements with neighbouring systems,  sectors. We will address our strategy for pursuing  with the service sector. Emissions from our industry  regulations, incentives and capacity-building 
as well as regional arrangements such as the  these emerging technologies later in this chapter.  sector accounted for about 60% of our total  programmes to encourage industries to 
Lao PDR-Thailand-Malaysia-Singapore Power  emissions in 2017. The most significant part of our  implement energy efficiency projects and 
Integration Project. Through these initiatives, we  industry emissions come from the combustion of  improve their energy management practices. 
can tap into new energy options that may be  fossil fuels in the refining and petrochemical sector.  We will push ahead in our efforts and aspire to 
unavailable in Singapore such as hydropower and  achieve annual improvement rates of 1% to 2% 
Energy efficiency improvement will remain a key 
large scale solar.  for industrial energy efficiency.
strategy to reduce the industry sector’s emissions. 
The longer-term vision of an ASEAN Power Grid  Improving energy efficiency and prioritising energy 
– in which electricity is traded freely between  reduction will give companies a competitive edge 
ASEAN member states – will enhance regional  in an increasingly carbon-constrained world. We 
energy connectivity, trade and cooperation.  will push for our industries to be among the best-
Greater grid interconnections within ASEAN  in-class in global energy and carbon efficiency. We 
will also help the region reach its aspiration of  will also study how advances in technology can help 
increasing the share of renewable energy in its  drive decarbonisation in industrial processes in the 
energy mix to 23% by 2025, and allow Singapore  longer-term. 
to access green electricity from the region. 
Energy costs are not subsidised in Singapore, and 
there is an economy-wide carbon tax. Companies 
are therefore incentivised to use energy judiciously 
and embrace energy-efficient technologies. The 
Government facilitates the adoption of energy-
efficient technologies through grants and other 
policy tools to help companies overcome high 
upfront capital investments and other non-market 
barriers, in order to reap longer-term energy and 
lower carbon emissions.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 44 45 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Regulation to improve energy efficiency
The Energy Conservation Act (ECA),  the facility design to identify technically 
introduced in 2013, was Singapore’s first  and economically feasible energy efficiency 
legislative framework for industrial energy  improvement opportunities for incorporation 
efficiency. It mandated energy management  in the new facilities. These companies must 
practices to steer companies to improve  also report the energy performance of key 
their energy efficiency practices. Since the  systems that account for at least 80% of the 
enactment of the ECA, the annual energy  new facilities’ total energy consumption.  Annual EE Improvement
efficiency improvement rate20 of the industry  From 2021, companies regulated under the 
sector has steadily increased from 0.4% in  ECA will be required to have a structured 
2014 to 0.95% in 2018.  energy management system. They will also 
be required to conduct regular assessments  1.6%
1.41%
The Government enhanced the ECA in  to identify energy efficiency opportunities 
1.4%
2017 to include a new suite of measures  at their industrial facilities. Minimum Energy 
that is being progressively implemented.  Efficiency Standards (MEES) have also been 
1.2%
Since 2018, companies investing in new  introduced to phase out the least efficient 
and major expansions of energy-intensive  industrial electric motors in 2018 and chilled  0.95%
1.0%
0.87%
industrial facilities are required to review  water systems in 2020. 
0.8%
Energy-Intensive Industrial Companies 0.59%
0.6%
Who are affected? In the business of:  0.41%
0.4%
54 1 Manufacturing & related services
TJ/yr
Supply of electricity, gas, steam,  0.2%
2
compressed air & chilled water
i.e. 15 GWh/yr  for 
2 out of 3 preceding years  3 Water supply & sewage & waste management  0.0%
2014 2015 2016 2017 2018
Mandatory Energy Management Practices:  Annual energy efficiency improvement of the industry sector in Singapore
and
Appoint Monitor & report Submit
In-house energy manager   Energy use & energy performance of facility  Energy Efficiency 
(SCEM -certified) and key energy-consuming systems* Improvement plan 
* Account for 80% of the facility’s annual energy consumption 
Key requirements under the Energy Conservation Act
20  Energy efficiency improvement rate is calculated as the energy savings realised in a year over energy consumption in the immediate preceding year, based on 
energy efficiency measures reported by companies.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 46 47 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Incentives to improve energy efficiency  Capacity building
Companies may face significant challenges in  measures, carry out energy assessments to identify  •  The Energy Efficiency Fund (E2F) and  The effectiveness of our energy efficiency 
implementing energy efficiency projects. Key  and implement energy efficiency opportunities. The  the Resource Efficiency Grant for Energy  efforts will also depend on building up the 
challenges include the high upfront capital cost of  Government expects revenue of about S$1 billion from  cover costs for equipment, materials and  capability, knowledge and expertise of 
more energy-efficient technologies or processes, and  the carbon tax revenue over the first five years. We are  consumables, technical software and  professionals and companies in the energy 
difficulties in implementing these energy efficiency  prepared to spend more than the amount collected  professional services. To further support  sector. These initiatives include: 
projects at their existing industrial facilities due to  during this period to support companies, including  industrial facilities in being more energy-
infrastructural constraints. The Government provides  small and medium enterprises (SMEs) and Generation  efficient, the funding support for both 
•  The Energy Efficiency Opportunities (EEO) 
assistance to help companies overcome these barriers.  Companies (Gencos), to improve their energy and  initiatives was increased in 2019 from a 
Assessor Certification Scheme was jointly 
carbon efficiency by adopting greener and cleaner  cap of 30% to a cap of 50%.
developed by the Government and the 
Since 2005, the Government has provided grants to  technologies and practices.
Institution of Engineers, Singapore (IES) 
help industrial facilities review their facility design  •  Accurate monitoring of energy consumption 
in 2018. To support the enhanced ECA 
to incorporate energy and resource efficiency  helps companies identify opportunities for 
requirements, companies can identify 
energy efficiency improvement. In October 
engineers to be certified as EEO Assessors 
2019, the Government launched a new grant 
to conduct energy assessments for energy-
Energy Efficiency Fund under the E2F to encourage companies 
intensive industrial facilities. 
to implement energy management 
information systems. These systems can 
•  The Energy Efficiency Technology Centre 
help companies more accurately monitor 
(EETC) is a collaboration between the 
and analyse their energy usage using real-
Government and the Singapore Institute 
RESOURCE EFFICIENT  time data, to identify performance gaps and 
of Technology (SIT) to help companies, in 
ENERGY ASSESSMENT OF  DESIGN OF NEW 
opportunities for improvement. 
EXISTING FACILITIES FACILITIES AND MAJOR  particular SMEs, discover and implement 
EXPANSIONS energy efficiency improvement measures 
and build up local industrial energy efficiency 
capabilities. Participating SMEs will receive 
ENERGY  a diagnosis of their energy performance and 
recommendations on areas of improvement, 
EFFICIENCY 
and have their staff trained in energy 
FUND
assessment skills to enable continuous 
improvement in energy efficiency.
ENERGY MANAGEMENT  ADOPTING OF 
INFORMATION SYSTEM ENERGY EFFICIENT 
(EMIS) TECHNOLOGIES
End-to-end approach for incentives in the industry sector
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 48 49 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
•  HP Singapore (Private) Limited (2019  Emerging low-carbon 
recipient): Implemented ISO 50001 Energy  alternatives 
Management System certification across its 
three manufacturing plants in Singapore, the 
Fostering a culture of sustained energy efficiency improvement
Amongst the promising low-carbon 
first global HP site to do so, and established 
technologies being explored, CCUS and 
an energy policy to reduce its emissions. Its 
To support private sector efforts in energy efficiency, the Government 
low-carbon hydrogen (as alternative 
key initiatives included using online energy 
launched the Energy Efficiency National Partnership (EENP) 
fuel and industrial feedstock) can be 
monitoring systems to proactively reduce 
programme in 2010. The EENP provides networking opportunities 
significant needle-movers to support the 
energy wastage, installing solar PV systems 
and resources, and facilitates the sharing of best practices on energy 
decarbonisation of the industry sector. We 
across its manufacturing sites, improving the 
management. The annual EENP Awards recognises companies’ 
will address our strategy for pursuing these 
efficiency of its chillers, replacing tube lighting 
commitment to improve energy efficiency and management. Examples 
technologies later in this chapter.
with energy-efficient light-emitting diodes 
of the best practices and initiatives of the EENP “Excellence in Energy 
(LEDs), replacing its air compressors with 
Management” award recipients are provided below. 
more energy-efficient sets, and improving its 
heating system.
•  Roche Singapore Technical Operations Pte Ltd  
(2019 recipient): Established sustainability 
targets for reducing water consumption, energy 
consumption and waste generation, initiated 
sustainability projects and internal awareness 
campaigns and participated in external training 
programmes to build capacity on sustainable 
practices. Its key projects for reducing energy 
consumption included adding an insulation 
coating on boilers, using heat recovery for its air 
handling unit and replacing chillers.
•  BASF South East Asia Pte Ltd (2018 recipient): 
Introduced measures to improve energy 
efficiency of their processes, maintenance, 
and modification projects, such as bypassing 
a heating a cooling step in a crystallisation 
process with no impact on product quality. 
Other key projects include replacing chilled 
Winners of the EENP 2019 were recognised for their best practices and innovations in 
energy efficiency and management. water and glycol chillers with more energy-
efficient models, and arranging training 
sessions for energy managers to promote 
energy stewardship among employees.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 50 51 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
TRANSPORT
20-Minute Towns
Schools Parks
Current landscape Reducing emissions  
through Walk-Cycle-Ride 
As of 2017, emissions from domestic transport  20 mins
accounted for about 15.2% of Singapore’s  Increasing the public transport modal share has 
Hawker
Home
national emissions, with private cars contributing  been a key strategy to reducing emissions in  Neighbourhood  Centres
the largest share of land transport emissions. We  Singapore. We are a global pioneer in controlling  Centre
have comprehensive measures to discourage  vehicle population and reducing traffic congestion.
vehicle ownership and usage, through a vehicle 
quota system and road pricing. Since 2018, we  By 2040, Singapore aims to establish WCR, 
have capped private car and motorcycle growth  comprising active mobility21 as well as public and 
at zero. In 2013, we introduced a system of  shared transport modes, as the preferred way to  Polyclinics Retail Shops
rebates and surcharges to encourage car buyers  travel. All journeys to the nearest neighbourhood 
to purchase low-emission cars. centre using WCR modes of transport will take 
no more than 20 minutes, while nine in ten of 
Building on this, we have drawn up a vision of a  peak period WCR journeys, such as between the 
clean and green transport system for generations  home and workplace, will be completed in less 
of Singaporeans, with a well-connected, inclusive  than 45 minutes. By expanding and improving our 
and green transport network that supports a  transport infrastructure to reduce travel times and 
growing community and economy.  encourage more people to take WCR transport  45-Minute City Business
Parks
modes, we can reduce our vehicular emissions 
We are making Walk-Cycle-Ride (WCR) the  footprint further. 
preferred modes of transport, introducing 
cleaner and greener vehicles on our roads, and  Business
Nodes
enhancing the environmental friendliness of 
our transport infrastructure. 45 mins
Home
Work
Regional 
Centres
Industrial 
Estates
All journeys within a town, using public, shared and active modes of transport will take no more than 
20 minutes, while nine in ten peak period journeys, such as between the home and workplace, using 
public, shared and active modes of transport, will be completed in less than 45 minutes. 
20  Active mobility modes include walking, cycling or using Personal Mobility Devices such as electric scooters. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 52 53 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Expanding the Active   Expanding and improving  
Mobility Network mass public transport and 
shared transport
Singapore will accelerate the building of cycling  Singapore will continue to push for public 
paths and active mobility infrastructure to  transport, which has the lowest emissions per 
make cycling and walking more convenient and  passenger journey, to be the preferred transport 
attractive. By 2040, our cycling path network  mode. Increasing the public transport modal split 
will be extended to more than 1,000km from  will remain essential for supporting our mobility 
440km in 2019. Under the Walk2Ride programme,  needs while reducing transport emissions. We 
which was introduced in the 2013 Land Transport  will continue to encourage people to switch from 
Master Plan, the Government built 200km of  private to public transport by expanding and 
sheltered walkways from transport nodes to  improving the public transport system by:
homes and public amenities. A further 150km of 
these covered linkways will be added by 2040. In 
•  Expanding the rail network from 230km in 
addition, private developers will have to submit 
2017 to 360km by 2030, with eight in ten 
walking and cycling plans as part of development 
households to be within a ten-minute walk 
applications. These measures will help facilitate 
from a train station;
safe and convenient first-and-last mile connections 
between homes, public amenities and key public 
•  Progressively implementing Transit 
transport nodes, therefore encouraging more 
Priority Corridors that serve as dedicated 
commuters to walk or cycle as opposed to taking 
and continuous bus lanes and deploying 
private transport.  
smarter traffic control solutions to reduce 
passengers’ commute times; and
To encourage more people to take public transport, our public housing towns are designed such that their 
•  Maintaining an open and contestable 
transport hubs integrate train stations with bus interchanges and are equipped with sheltered walkways that 
point-to-point market to allow people  connect to housing blocks and amenities. 
to have access to taxis and private hire 
cars, and encouraging car-sharing to give 
commuters more choices for their journeys 
without having to own a car.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 54 55 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Cleaner and greener vehicles  
on our roads Greener transport infrastructure 
Singapore is working to enhance the overall  In addition, based on the promising results of the  We are also enhancing our existing transport 
carbon efficiency of our land transport system  Vehicular Emissions Scheme that provides rebates  infrastructure and building new transport facilities 
through the large-scale adoption of green vehicles.  to car owners and taxi operators who use cleaner  that are more energy-efficient and sustainable.
By 2040, we aim to phase out internal combustion  car models, the Government will introduce a 
engine vehicles and have all vehicles running  similar scheme, the Commercial Vehicle Emissions 
on cleaner energy. We will introduce policies  Scheme, for light goods vehicles. 
and initiatives to encourage the adoption of 
EVs. The public sector itself will take the lead and  To make EVs more accessible and promote their 
A greener commute
progressively procure and use cleaner vehicles. adoption, Singapore will expand the public charging 
infrastructure for EVs. The Government will 
Canberra Station, which is the newest Mass Rapid 
To promote the adoption of cleaner and more  work with the private sector to improve charging 
Transit (MRT) station in Singapore, opened for 
environmentally friendly vehicles, the Government  provisions in public and private carparks. By 2030, 
service in November 2019. In addition to covered 
will implement an EV Early Adoption Incentive  we aim to have up to 28,000 chargers in public 
linkways and bicycle parking lots to facilitate 
scheme from 2021 to 2023 to encourage the early  carparks island-wide, from around 1,600 today.
convenient first-and-last mile journeys to and 
adoption of cleaner vehicles. Under this incentive, 
from the station, Canberra Station has many green 
drivers and businesses who purchase fully electric  These efforts are expected to make a significant 
features such as energy-efficient air-conditioning, 
cars and taxis will receive a rebate of up to 45% off  difference. Technological advancements on EV 
LED lighting systems and green roofs. With its 
the vehicle’s Additional Registration Fee,22 capped  charging and the availability of attractive, cost-
extensive use of environmentally friendly building 
at S$20,000.  effective EV models in the market will also be 
materials, products and services, Canberra 
important factors that will influence how quickly 
Station became the first MRT station to receive 
we can achieve these goals.
the Green Mark Platinum certification under the 
Green Mark scheme for transit stations.
Canberra Station’s clear roof panels and glass panels 
installed along its façade are able to take advantage of 
natural lighting to be more energy efficient. 
The Nanyang Technological University, Singapore   Charging infrastructure will be improved as part of efforts to 
(NTU Singapore) and Volvo Buses are trialling a full size,  support the adoption of EVs. 
autonomous electric bus equipped with a comprehensive 
artificial intelligence system developed by NTU 
Singapore engineers.
22  The Additional Registration Fee is a tax imposed upon registration of a vehicle and is calculated based on a percentage of the Open Market Value of the vehicle. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 56 57 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Energy efficiency improvements  
at Changi Airport
Singapore has proactively taken measures to  Green innovation and emission reductions   Tuas Port – Port of the Future
develop Changi Airport as a world-class air  in Singapore’s maritime sector 
hub that champions sustainability. To improve  Expected to be fully completed in 2040, the 
its energy efficiency, a series of equipment  The Government has been working with  new Tuas Port will be the world’s largest fully 
replacement and service improvement projects  Greening airport operations stakeholders to improve the sustainability of our  automated terminal in a single location. It 
have taken place throughout the airport, such as  port infrastructure. Singapore’s main commercial  will have a fleet of over 1,000 fully electric 
modernising existing lifts, upgrading to energy- With the support of ground handling partners,  port terminal operators, PSA Corporation Limited  automated guided vehicles that have a carbon 
efficient chillers and replacing conventional  Changi Airport Group (CAG) has introduced  and Jurong Port Pte Ltd, have deployed solar PV  footprint of 25% less than that of conventional 
lighting in terminal buildings with LED lights. clean-energy tractors within the baggage  systems at their terminals and embarked on other  diesel-powered prime movers. The port will 
handling areas, starting with Terminal 4 in  electrification projects at existing terminals.  also feature electric automated rail-mounted 
The new Terminal 5 will also be designed and  November 2017. CAG has also installed 114  gantry cranes to be more energy-efficient. 
built according to stringent energy efficiency  charging points for its 80 electric baggage 
standards and is anticipated to achieve Green  tractors at the airside of its passenger terminals. 
Mark Platinum standards. As Terminal 5’s  The fleet of electric baggage tractors will grow 
development will extend well into the 2020s, the  to over 300 tractors by end-2020. This will 
adoption of new emerging technologies may  support the Changi Airport community’s goal 
result in further improvements in the terminal’s  of reducing airside emissions and creating a 
energy efficiency. better work environment.
In addition to an automated wharf and yard that will raise 
Electric baggage handling tractors are deployed at   efficiency, the waters around Tuas Port will be managed 
Changi Airport Terminal 4. with a next-generation vessel traffic management system 
for safe and efficient navigation.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 58 59 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
BUILDINGS
Current landscape Reducing energy use and 
increasing sustainability
As Singapore is a highly urbanised city-state, the 
building sector contributed 14.6% of our total  The Building and Construction Authority (BCA) 
emissions in 2017. As such, greening our buildings  Green Mark Scheme was launched in January 2005 
is an integral part of reducing Singapore’s overall  as an initiative to drive Singapore’s construction 
Features of SLE buildings
long-term emissions. The Government has  industry towards more environmentally friendly 
worked closely with stakeholders to roll out a  buildings. It is a benchmarking scheme to promote 
The SLE Buildings Programme comprises: 
comprehensive suite of initiatives and policies  sustainability in the built environment and raise 
 
under three successive editions of Green Building  environmental awareness among developers, 
(i)  Green Mark Scheme for SLE buildings,   The Government established the Green 
Masterplans. These Masterplans have steered  designers, and builders. The coverage of the 
(ii)  SLE Challenge, and   Buildings Innovation Cluster (GBIC) programme 
Singapore’s green building efforts, comprising a  benchmarking scheme extends from the start of 
(iii) SLE Buildings Technology Roadmap. in 2014 to fund collaborative research on 
mix of regulatory policies and financial incentives,  the project’s conceptualisation and design, to its 
environmentally sustainable buildings between 
workforce capability-building programmes,  construction and even operation. 
•  The Green Mark Scheme for SLE buildings  the Built Environment sector and the research 
engagement and awareness activities, and R&D 
was developed to encourage industry to push  community. The GBIC programme develops 
capability-building programmes. 
Spurring the adoption of Super Low 
boundaries on energy efficiency to achieve  innovative and viable solutions to achieving SLE 
Energy buildings 
best-in-class building energy performance in  buildings. By tapping on GBIC, developers can 
Singapore has set a target to green 80% of our 
a cost-effective manner. SLE buildings achieve  work with research partners to develop new 
total building gross floor area (GFA) by 2030. As of  Widespread adoption of Super Low Energy (SLE) 
at least 60% energy savings (compared to  energy efficiency solutions and test-bed them  
March 2020, we have greened more than 40% of  buildings in Singapore will help reduce energy 
our 2005 building code baseline) by adopting  in their own buildings.
our total building GFA. We will continue to pursue  use and emissions in the buildings sector. The 
energy-efficient measures and deploying on-site 
efforts towards this target through promoting  Government has worked closely with our industries 
renewable energy solutions. BCA has also set up the SLE Buildings Smart 
sustainable and energy-efficient design and  and academia to co-develop the SLE Buildings 
Hub, a one-stop knowledge centre to support 
performance at the individual building level as  Programme, launched in September 2018. The SLE 
•  The SLE Challenge was launched in September  the industry’s efforts with implementing 
well as at the district level.  Buildings Programme encourages the deployment 
2018. To date, 20 progressive public and private  SLE building standards. The Smart Hub is a 
of cost-effective, energy-efficient and renewable 
developers have stepped forward to take the  central database that collects information 
energy solutions in the built environment sector. 
lead by committing to achieve at least one  from existing buildings and reports of 
This will also encourage the development of more 
Green Mark SLE project within five years. completed R&D projects. Researchers may 
Zero Energy buildings that produce as much 
access the data from the Smart Hub to 
electricity as they consume, or Positive Energy 
•  The SLE Buildings Technology Roadmap  analyse the performance of the demonstrated 
buildings that produce surplus electricity that can 
examines a wide spectrum of emerging energy  technologies, while building owners can refer 
be fed into the electricity grid.
technologies, analyses their interaction and  to the expanding list of green technologies 
integration, and explores their feasibility in  and select options best suited to their needs. 
our tropical and urban context. The Roadmap  Industry players may also access the Smart 
comprises 60 innovative solutions to help the  Hub for best practices and success stories.
industry design and develop cost-effective 
SLE buildings.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 60 61 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Surbana Jurong Campus
NUS, School of Design & Environment, SDE 4
The Surbana Jurong campus is the new global headquarters of Surbana Jurong, which has grown 
As the first purpose-built net-zero energy building in Singapore commissioned by a tertiary  to become one of the largest Asia-based urban and infrastructure consultancy firms in the world. 
institution, SDE 4 makes the case – through design and operations – that stringent energy  It is located at the new Jurong Innovation District, the next-generation district in Singapore to 
targets for Singapore buildings are possible without sacrificing functional efficiency or  promote the future of innovation for enterprise, learning and living. When completed by 2021, 
architectural aesthetics. the 68,915m² development will serve to demonstrate what a smart, sustainable and future-ready 
workplace looks like.
BCA Green Mark Award  BCA Green Mark Award 
Platinum (Zero Energy) Platinum (Super Low Energy)
Rating (2019)  Rating (2019) 
Estimated Percentage 
Estimated Percentage 
60.8%
60.8%
Annual Energy Savings
Annual Energy Savings23 
Notable Green Features •  First institution in Singapore to extensively deploy a hybrid- Notable Green Features •  Optimised design of the shape and size of buildings for 
greater environmental performance (e.g. usage of daylight, 
cooling system. 
optimal use of renewable energy sources).  
•  With daylight utilisation maximised through architectural 
design, energy savings are further enhanced through a  •  Smart lighting controls. 
network of photocell and   •  Live energy and water monitoring dashboard. 
vacancy sensors. 
•  Integrated Building Management System (iBMS) to ensure 
•  Extensive roof coverage with solar PV arrays allows SDE 4  building systems perform optimally in relation to current 
to generate all its energy requirements within the building  demand.
footprint. 
•  Rain gardens and bio-swale built into design to enhance  
•  Water saving features such as rainwater harvesting,  water sustainability. 
condensate water recycling, and greywater recycling boost 
•  Smart cooling system with under-floor air 
the water sustainability of the building. 
distribution system.
•  Full adoption of precast walls, columns, beams and planks.
23  Estimated Percentage Annual Energy Savings refers to the estimated improvement in energy efficiency compared to 2005 levels achieved by implementing 
passive and active energy efficiency measures. When these savings are combined with power generated by renewable sources, buildings’ overall energy 
status can be net-zero or positive.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 62 63 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Improving building   Sustaining optimal  
energy efficiency  performance throughout  
the building lifecycle
The Government will continue to put in place 
measures to improve building energy efficiency,  The operations phase of a building is the longest 
and encourage building owners and developers  stage in its lifecycle. Thus, it is important that 
to implement energy efficiency projects. In the  buildings are designed for optimal performance 
next step of our Green Building journey, we will  and maintenance during this phase. 
work with all stakeholders, including developers, 
building owners, Built Environment professionals  Sound facility management (FM) practices will 
and the public to co-create the Singapore Green  help our buildings achieve sustained optimal 
Building Masterplan 2020 (SGBMP 2020). Apart  performance. Incorporating elements of Design for 
from traditional industry stakeholders, such as the  Maintainability24 upfront during the building design 
trade associations and chambers, BCA will also be  stage will ensure ease of maintenance and also help 
NTU Singapore, Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information
engaging other groups, including tenants, home- our buildings operate optimally throughout their 
buyers, youths and activists for the development  lifespan. Additionally, the use of Smart FM solutions 
The Wee Kim Wee School of Communication and Information (SCI) is a mixed development 
of SGBMP 2020. can help to optimise energy performance.
(Institutional and Offices) built in 1996 with a gross floor area of 9,024.55m². The SCI building 
consists of five levels with a central open atrium. It has advanced laboratory facilities for audio, 
One of the key initiatives under SGBMP 2020 will 
video, radio, television and print media, among others. The project is an existing building that 
be to review the minimum energy performance 
has been refurbished to achieve Green Mark Platinum (Zero Energy) rating. 
standards for buildings. The Government plans to 
Challenges and potential 
make the minimum energy performance standards 
opportunities
more stringent for new and existing buildings in 
the coming years. Raising the energy performance 
BCA Green Mark 
Platinum (Zero Energy) of buildings will lower emissions and also allow  As Singapore greens the majority of its buildings 
Award Rating (2019) 
building owners to reap cost savings over the  and pushes the boundaries in building energy 
Notable Green  •  Efficient water-cooled air-conditioning system.  building lifecycle.  efficiency, the challenge remains to nudge the 
Features owners of less energy-efficient buildings into taking 
•  Variable speed drives for pumps and cooling towers. 
We will also provide the identity of all buildings  action to improve the energy performance of their 
•  Energy-efficient Task LED lighting for all areas.  in the annual publication of buildings’ energy  buildings. We will explore ways to encourage and 
performance data, to facilitate benchmarking and  help these building owners advance their greening 
•  Attained PUB Water Efficient Building certification.
spur building owners to undertake retrofitting  efforts, which can reap energy and cost savings 
•  Provision of solar PV panels. 
measures to improve the energy efficiency of   throughout the building lifecycle. 
•  Use of motion sensors for toilets and staircases. their buildings. 
•  Automatic fresh air control.
•  Low friction loss electro-static air filter for air-handling units.
•  Future upgrade to passive displacement cooling with high efficiency 
pre-treated fresh air unit.
24  Design for Maintainability is the practice of integrating operations & maintenance considerations into project planning and design to achieve effectiveness, 
safety, and economy of maintenance tasks during the lifespan of a facility.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 64 65 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
HOUSEHOLDS
District-level  
energy savings
Staying cool with less energy
District-level measures to green the building  Advancements in technology and engineering 
Current landscape Reducing the household sector’s 
sector will enable even greater energy efficiency  have made it possible to cool Singapore while 
emissions for the long term
improvements, and more energy savings to be  using less energy and using our underground 
reaped. Beyond the individual building level, we  spaces more effectively. For example, instead  Emissions from the household sector accounted for 
intend to scale up efforts to the district level to  of conventional chillers and cooling towers  about 6.6% of emissions in Singapore in 2017. We  To reduce emissions in the household sector, the 
achieve wider adoption of sustainability measures.  in separate buildings, Singapore introduced  aim to achieve more energy savings by adjusting  Government promotes the use of energy-efficient 
District-level concepts will be test-bedded in  district cooling systems at the Marina Bay  behaviour and consumption patterns. By having  appliances in homes and encourages energy 
identified districts, and if successful, considered  area in 2006. The Marina Bay district cooling  an energy-efficient home, buying energy-efficient  conservation habits amongst households. The 
for future districts. Some concepts under  system centralises the production of chilled  appliances and adopting good energy consumption  Mandatory Energy Labelling Scheme (MELS) and 
consideration include enhancing BCA’s Green  water that is piped into buildings within the  habits, households will enjoy lower utility bills  the Minimum Energy Performance Standards 
Mark Scheme for Districts, sharing of renewable  district to support their air-conditioning  whilst contributing towards climate action. The  (MEPS) are key policies undertaken to reduce energy 
energy sources and district-level cooling. systems, and has helped customers achieve  Government will continue implementing initiatives  consumption and emissions in the household sector 
significant energy savings. Apart from  to empower homeowners to make better choices  through the use of energy-efficient appliances. 
reducing energy costs, the district cooling  and influence usage behaviour.
system is built 20m to 25m underground, 
Mandatory Energy Labelling Scheme
removing the need for chilling equipment in 
each building, and freeing up more premium 
To help consumers make more informed 
commercial space. More district cooling 
purchasing decisions, the Government introduced 
systems will be rolled out over time. 
MELS in 2008, which requires suppliers of major 
energy-consuming household appliances to affix 
their products with energy labels. To date, MELS 
covers air-conditioners, refrigerators, televisions, 
clothes dryers and lamps. We will continue to 
assess the feasibility of extending MELS to other 
appliances, such as water heaters.
With two district cooling plants at Marina Bay Sands 
and One Raffles Quay, chilled water is centrally 
produced to support air-conditioning systems in 
buildings in the Marina Bay area, helping them save 
energy and cost.
Energy label for air-conditioners
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 66 67 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Raising Minimum Energy   Incentives to purchase  Increasing awareness of 
Performance Standards climate-friendly appliances energy-efficient appliances Smart Home Technologies
MEPS raises the average energy efficiency of  The Government introduced a S$24.8 million  Increasing awareness of the importance and  Currently, the analogue electricity meters installed 
household appliances by removing energy  Climate-friendly Household Package in 2020  ways of conserving energy is also key to reducing  at households are read manually once every two 
inefficient appliances from the market. This protects  to foster a climate-friendly mindset among  energy use in households. The Government will  months, and households are billed based on 
consumers from being locked into the high energy  households and encourage individuals to take  continue different outreach initiatives to promote  estimated and actual consumption on alternate 
costs that result from operating energy inefficient  action to reduce energy and water consumption.  energy efficiency and conservation, across several  months. Advanced electricity meters will be 
appliances. Currently, MEPS covers air-conditioners,  All households living in one-, two- and three-room  platforms to target different audiences. One  deployed in all Singapore households within the 
refrigerators, clothes dryers and lamps.  public housing apartments in Singapore will receive  example is “The Energy-Saving Challenge”, where  next five years. With advanced electricity meters, 
a S$150 voucher to purchase energy-efficient and  households are encouraged to reduce their energy  households can access and track their half-hourly 
Singapore will regularly review the MEPS to ensure  climate-friendly refrigerators and a S$50 voucher  consumption by practising energy-saving habits. electricity consumption via the (Singapore Power) 
that it provides adequate differentiation of appliance  to purchase water-efficient shower fittings. In  SP Utilities mobile application. This will allow them to 
models and reflects improvements in energy  addition, the “Switch and Save – Use LED” (SSUL)  better understand their consumption patterns and 
efficient technologies in the market. We aim to  programme, first launched in 2018 to all one-room  reduce their usage to be more energy-efficient.
have all light bulbs to be as energy-efficient as LED  to two-room HDB households, has been expanded 
bulbs from 2023 onwards. This will save households  to all three-room public housing households. Under 
about S$3.5 million in energy costs annually.  this SSUL programme, each eligible household will 
We will also continue to assess the feasibility of  receive a S$25 voucher to purchase LED lights. The 
Building an Eco Town
extending the coverage of MEPS to other appliances  package can save up to 90 gigawatt hours (GWh), 
and progressively raise the standards for these  equivalent to 40 ktCO e per year.
2
In Tampines town, we have created a community-
appliances to best-in-class levels. 
based circular ecosystem for food production. 
Food waste will be segregated to be fed to black 
Since the introduction of MELS and MEPS, the 
soldier fly larvae. The larvae frass will be used to 
average energy efficiency of air-conditioners, 
fertilise a new vertical vegetable farm and the 
refrigerators and clothes dryers have improved by 
larvae will be fed to tilapias cultivated in a pond in 
42%, 46% and 14% respectively.25 In 2018, the total 
Tampines Park. The project will reduce food waste 
energy savings for all households from the use of 
and strengthen the community’s food resilience. 
more efficient household appliances was estimated 
to be about S$270 million. Singapore will continue 
In addition, Eco Boards, which are low-energy 
to look at ways to make the Energy Label more 
digital boards providing information on water 
prominent and useful to the consumers. For example, 
and energy use, will be built across Tampines to 
we are exploring the use of augmented reality to 
enhance the community’s mindfulness of their 
allow consumers to compare the lifecycle cost across 
Advanced electricity meters enable households to track 
resource use and illustrate the impact of green 
similar models, facilitating their purchase of more  their half-hourly electricity consumption via the SP Utilities 
infrastructure such as solar PV systems.
energy-efficient appliances. mobile app.
25  MELS and MEPS covered air-conditioners and refrigerators from 2008, whilst clothes dryers was included from 2009. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 68 69 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
WASTE  
Green Towns Programme
Since 2005, HDB has been driving  the deployment of solar panels to cover 
AND WATER
sustainability efforts in our public housing  70% of housing blocks. This will provide 
estates, which provide affordable housing  clean energy to power common services in 
to 80% of Singaporeans. Over the years,  our housing estates. To recycle rainwater, 
we have managed to achieve a 10%  we will pilot a new underground water 
reduction in annual energy consumption  detention system to capture and recycle 
in our public housing estates. Through  the rainwater for non-potable uses. We will  Current landscape 
the Green Towns Programme, HDB aims  also undertake a large-scale pilot on the 
to reduce annual energy consumption by  application of “cool paint”, which reduces 
The waste and water sectors represented around  To reduce the amount of energy use and emissions 
a further 15% by 2030. The programme  heat absorbed by HDB blocks. With the 
1.5% of our total emissions in 2017 and there are  in the water sector, we have taken key measures 
will focus on addressing three areas on  learning points and data collected from 
significant opportunities for mitigating these  such as deploying energy-efficient technologies to 
sustainability and liveability: (i) reducing  the pilot, the application of cool coatings 
emissions. Singapore strives to create resource- process and treat water, and policies to encourage 
energy consumption, (ii) recycling  can be extended island-wide. Finally, 
efficient waste and water management systems to  sustainable water consumption. 
rainwater and (iii) cooling HDB towns. we will increase the green cover on top 
reduce emissions in these sectors. 
decks of more multi-storey carparks by 
Achieving a sustainable level of water consumption 
To reduce energy consumption, the  repurposing them for urban farming, 
Singapore has successfully developed an efficient  and waste production, and managing the amount 
Government will install smart LED lighting  skyrise greenery or community gardens, 
waste management system over the years. In  of energy used will be important moving forward, 
in all public housing estates and scale up  where feasible.
Singapore, waste that is not recycled is incinerated  as waste quantities and water demand will likely 
in waste-to-energy (WTE) plants. This reduces the  continue to increase as our economy and population 
waste volume significantly by about 90%, while  grow. We will continue to push towards sustainable 
generating energy from the process. The excess  waste and water management, and explore avenues 
energy is sold to the grid, which helps to meet 2%  to reduce emissions in both sectors.
to 3% of Singapore’s electricity needs. Incinerating 
waste also generates less GHG emissions, including 
methane, compared to direct landfilling. 
Features of Green Towns Programme
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 70 71 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Waste reduction and recycling to reduce waste 
incineration
Singapore’s inaugural Zero Waste Masterplan launched in 2019 outlines our changing 
approach to managing waste to achieve our vision of a Zero Waste Nation. Under 
the Zero Waste Masterplan, we announced a new target to reduce the amount of 
waste sent to Semakau Landfill per capita per day by 30% by 2030. This is in addition 
to existing recycling targets under the Sustainable Singapore Blueprint 2015. 
Collectively, these targets would extend Semakau Landfill’s lifespan beyond 2035.26  
To achieve this new target, we are adopting a circular economy approach where waste 
is designed out of the value chain and the resources are maximised by keeping them 
in use for as long as possible. 
Aerial view of Singapore’s only landfill, Semakau Landfill A circular economy approach will require measures 
to be taken across the entire value chain
RECYCLE
Semakau Landfill
BETTER REPAIR
DESIGN REDUCE BUYING & REUSE
The development of Semakau Landfill, the first  Semakau Landfill. This international award affirms our 
offshore landfill in the region, showcases Singapore’s  efforts to leverage technology to manage Singapore's 
SUSTAINABLE  SUSTAINABLE  SUSTAINABLE WASTE 
innovative spirit and strong engineering capability,  waste effectively and sustainably.  PRODUCTION CONSUMPTION AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
in response to the twin challenges of Singapore’s 
growing waste generation and severe land  However, Semakau Landfill is not the silver bullet for 
constraints. The thriving coral colonies, mangrove  waste management. It is projected to run out of space  Segregation Incineration & 
landﬁlling
and wild birds in their natural habitat on Semakau  by 2035 based on current rates of waste disposal. 
Landfill show that the landfill operations and  We need a paradigm shift to manage our waste in  REDISTRIBUTE
preservation of the local natural environment can be  new, more sustainable ways to deal with our growing 
REFURBISH / REMANUFACTURE
both achieved at the same time. resource constraints and extend the lifespan of 
Semakau Landfill.  RECYCLE
The National Environment Agency (NEA) was awarded 
the 2019 Hassib J. Sabbagh Award for Engineering 
The circular economy approach outlined in the Zero Waste Masterplan Singapore 
Construction Excellence by the World Federation of 
Engineering Organisations for the development of 
26  Under the Sustainable Blueprint Singapore 2015, we aim to achieve a 70% overall recycling rate, 30% domestic recycling rate and 81% non-domestic recycling 
rate by 2030. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 72 73 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Promoting sustainable waste management:  Upgrading our waste management  Reducing water consumption and 
Resource Sustainability Act infrastructure to increase the efficiency   energy use in water treatment
of recycling and waste incineration
The landmark Resource Sustainability Act (RSA) 
introduced in 2019 encourages sustainable  Even as we implement new policies to achieve 
production and sustainable waste management  our vision of a Zero Waste Nation, we continue 
Promoting water conservation in households Promoting water efficiency in businesses  
by giving legislative effect to new upstream  to improve our existing waste management 
and industries 
measures to address our key priority waste  infrastructure to enhance waste treatment and 
The results of Singapore’s water conservation 
streams – e-waste, packaging waste including  resource recovery. 
efforts have been encouraging, with household  In addition to phasing out inefficient water fittings 
plastics, and food waste. The new measures 
water consumption decreasing from 148 litres  and appliances via the Mandatory Water Efficiency 
include an Extended Producer Responsibility  TuasOne WTE Plant, Singapore’s sixth WTE plant, 
per person per day in 2016 to 141 litres in 2019. To  Labelling Scheme, businesses/industries that 
(EPR) framework for e-waste, where producers  developed on 4.8 hectares of land and with a 
reduce water consumption further to 130 litres per  consume 60,000 m³ or more in the preceding year 
of regulated products bear the physical and/ treatment capacity of 750 tonnes of waste per 
person per day by 2030, PUB, Singapore’s National  are required to submit water efficiency management 
or financial responsibility for the sustainable  day per hectare, will be the most compact plant 
Water Agency, will continue to phase out inefficient  plans to PUB annually. This requirement promotes 
management of end-of-life products, and  in the world. When completed, it will also be 
water fittings and deploy 300,000 smart meters  the establishment of water management systems so 
mandatory food waste segregation and  the most efficient in energy generation among 
by 2021. The smart meters provide near real-time  that businesses/industries can better understand 
treatment for large commercial and industrial  Singapore’s existing WTE plants. The plant will 
consumption information and early leak detection  and manage their water usage. PUB is drawing 
food waste generators, above certain thresholds  help meet our waste incineration needs for the 
in households to encourage water conservation  on the data collected to develop water efficiency 
from 2024.  next 25 years, and will have the capacity to 
and reduce water loss through leaks. benchmarks and best practice guidelines to help 
incinerate 3,600 tonnes of waste per day.
businesses identify more opportunities to improve 
Producers of packaged products and  from incineration. 
water efficiency. 
supermarkets will also be required to report 
packaging data and submit plans to reduce, 
Reducing energy use in producing   Knowledge sharing is facilitated through the Water 
reuse or recycle packaging from 2021, with data 
Co-creating solutions with the community 
desalinated water  Efficiency Manager Course, where participants are 
collection to commence on 1 July 2020. The 
assessed and certified as Water Efficiency Managers. 
mandatory packaging reporting framework will 
Ground-up movements engaging communities 
PUB invests in research and technology to find  Water-efficient businesses are recognised via the 
also lay the foundation for an EPR framework for 
to promote sustainable waste management and 
more efficient ways to desalinate seawater, which  Water Efficient Building (Basic) certification and the 
managing packaging waste, including plastics. 
waste reduction, and drive awareness, action 
currently uses about 3.5 kWh/m³.We aim to  Water Efficiency Awards. Businesses can also tap 
This will ensure producers are responsible for 
and advocacy will continue to be important. 
minimally halve the energy used in the future  on PUB’s Water Efficiency Fund and Industrial Water 
the collection and recycling of the materials they 
These main areas of work include raising 
through a combination of technologies such as  Solutions Demonstration Fund to implement water-
use to package their products. The Government 
awareness among Singaporeans on the need for 
electro-deionisation, ultra-permeable membranes,  saving projects.
will be implementing the EPR for packaging 
sustainable consumption through campaigns 
Pressure Retarded Osmosis and other process 
waste in phases, starting with a Deposit Refund 
such as the “Say YES to Waste Less” Campaign, 
improvements. 
Scheme for beverage containers by 2022.27 The 
and inculcating values of environmental 
RSA marks a paradigm shift in our approach 
stewardship in our young as part of the school 
to waste management – while efficient waste 
curriculum for Character and Citizen Education. 
disposal is necessary, our primary goal is to 
More details are provided in Chapter 7.
reduce, reuse and recycle to divert waste away 
from incineration. 
27  Generally, with a Deposit Refund Scheme for beverage containers, producers would finance the take-back of the used beverage containers with refunds 
offered to consumers when they return their empty beverage containers to designated return points.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 74 75 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
FORESTRY
Maximising Resource and Energy Recovery – the Tuas Nexus
To leverage the water-energy-waste nexus, the Government is building an integrated development 
comprising the Tuas Water Reclamation Plant and the Integrated Waste Management Facility, 
collectively known as the “Tuas Nexus”. The co-location of these facilities allows food waste 
and used water sludge to be co-digested to generate up to three times more biogas than 
conventional sludge treatment processes. The biogas generated will boost electricity production  Current landscape  Transformation of Singapore 
and contribute to making Tuas Nexus an energy self-sufficient facility. Incinerated bottom ash,  into a City in Nature
which would otherwise be landfilled, will also be extracted from the waste at Tuas Nexus, further 
Singapore is one of the most densely populated 
extending the lifespan of Semakau Landfill. The facility is expected to be completed by 2027. 
countries in the world, without a hinterland or  As the next bound of our urban planning, we 
forestry industry. Nonetheless, we safeguard more  will transform Singapore into a City in Nature to 
than 7,800 hectares of green spaces, consisting of  create a sustainable and distinctive Singapore 
four nature reserves, nature areas, over 350 parks  that provides a high-quality living environment 
and an extensive network of streetscape greenery.  for residents. Moving forward, we will continue 
These green spaces serve as carbon sinks and are  to increase our green spaces by extending our 
used for recreational and educational purposes.  nature park network, intensifying nature in our 
We will continue to protect and enhance these  new and redeveloped gardens and parks, restoring 
carbon sinks through sustainable management  nature in our urban areas, and strengthening the 
and nature conservation.  connectivity between Singapore’s green spaces. 
City in Nature has been infused into our city’s 
Singapore remains committed to the long-term 
planning and development systems to ensure 
sustainability of our forests and vegetated areas. 
that the greening of the city increases even as we 
Singapore’s green policies began with the vision 
develop. This also allows us to effectively protect 
of transforming Singapore into a Garden City in 
our natural heritage and enhance the resilience of 
the 1960s. We have since evolved into a biophilic 
our natural ecosystem.
City in a Garden, where greenery pervades our 
urban landscape.
Drawing on the water-energy-waste synergy allows the Tuas Nexus facility to be fully energy self-sufficient.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 76 77 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Safeguarding Singapore’s   Restoring nature in our  
carbon sinks  urban areas 
We strengthen our climate resilience by safeguarding  Coastal and marine environments are also effective  As part of our efforts to restore nature in 
and enhancing our natural ecosystems that provide  ecosystems in carbon storage and sequestration.  Singapore’s urban areas, we will intensify the 
carbon storage and sequestration. These ecosystems  Carbon stocks in mangrove ecosystems can be  greening of our streetscapes through creating 
are protected within our four legally gazetted nature  three times or more that of terrestrial forests. In this  Nature Ways, which are roads that feature forest-like 
reserves in Singapore, where they receive protection  regard, mangrove restoration projects are being  structures built with multi-tiered planting. Over the 
for biodiversity conservation purposes. Some 350  implemented at key conservation sites such as  long term, we aspire to make every road a Nature 
hectares of forested areas around nature reserves  Sungei Buloh Wetland Reserve. Mandai Mangrove  Way to provide a stronger network of ecological 
have been converted to nature parks to serve as  and Mudflat will be conserved as a nature park. To  connectivity across the island, by providing green 
complementary habitats and buffers to safeguard our  complement the habitats at Sungei Buloh Wetland  corridors to link green nodes.
nature reserves against the impact of urbanisation  Reserve and Mandai Mangrove and Mudflat, we 
and human activities. The nature parks also provide  will also be establishing a 40-hectare nature park at  We will also increase the skyrise greenery footprint 
complementary habitats for Singapore’s native flora  Khatib Bongsu, a rich mangrove and mudflat habitat  in our buildings and infrastructure, by encouraging 
and fauna to thrive beyond the nature reserves. We  on the northeastern coast of Singapore. the adoption of vertical green walls, green roofs 
The Kheam Hock Nature Way provides a green corridor 
will continue to grow our nature park network, and  and rooftop gardens that mimic epiphytic plants in 
for birds and butterflies to travel between the Central 
aim to have at least an additional 200 hectares of  a tropical rainforest. This will create a naturalistic 
Catchment Nature Reserve and the Singapore Botanic 
nature parks by 2030. landscape that adds more greenery across Singapore  Gardens. As part of the City in Nature vision, there will be 
and helps to mitigate the urban heat island effect. We  300km of Nature Ways in Singapore by 2030, with future 
plans to make every road a Nature Way. 
aim to have 200 hectares of skyrise greenery by 2030, 
up from 120 hectares currently. We are working on 
greening Singapore’s industrial estates, which are 
among the hottest areas in Singapore. More than 
100,000 trees will be planted in industrial estates by 
2030. We have begun working with development 
partners and other stakeholders to plant more than 
30,000 trees on Jurong Island alone. 
As part of our efforts under City in Nature, we have 
launched a “One Million Trees” movement to plant a 
million trees across Singapore by 2030. These trees 
will be planted along streets and park connectors, 
and in gardens, parks, nature reserves and nature 
parks. The movement will involve the community 
through initiatives such as the Community in Nature 
Students and teachers from St Margaret’s School 
(CIN). CIN connects and engages different groups in 
participating in a BioBlitz survey. In 2019, about 4,900 
the community to help conserve Singapore’s natural 
citizen scientists were engaged in activities, boosting 
The Mandai Mangrove and Mudflat is home to threatened species of plants  heritage, encouraging Singaporeans to bond over,  nature conservation efforts.
and will be conserved as a nature park. and with, nature.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 78 79 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
CROSS-SECTORAL 
Tax rate
The carbon tax rate is set at S$5/tCO e in the first 
2
instance from 2019 to 2023. This serves as a transition 
MEASURES
period for facilities to implement energy efficiency 
and emissions reduction projects. The carbon tax will 
be reviewed by 2023, with the intention to increase 
it to a rate of between S$10/tCO e and S$15/tCO e 
2 2
by 2030. In doing so, the Government will take into 
Apart from sectoral measures, Singapore 
account international climate change developments, 
also adopts cross-sectoral measures 
the progress of Singapore’s emissions mitigation 
to drive comprehensive climate action 
efforts and economic competitiveness. 
across multiple sectors. 
Revenue use
The Government is prepared to spend more than the 
Carbon pricing
estimated S$1 billion in carbon tax revenues collected 
in the first five years, to help companies invest in 
Singapore implemented a carbon tax, the first carbon  energy- and carbon-efficient technologies. 
pricing scheme in Southeast Asia, on 1 January 2019. 
The carbon tax provides the price signal to encourage  Leveraging international market-based 
companies to reduce their emissions, yet gives them  mechanisms
the flexibility to take action where it makes the most  The Paris Agreement also provides for jurisdictions 
economic sense. The carbon tax is not standalone. It  to cooperate in achieving their climate pledges, such 
forms part of our comprehensive suite of mitigation  as through the use of international carbon credits 
measures to reduce emissions, create green growth  or through the linking of carbon pricing systems. 
opportunities, and transit to an energy-efficient  Singapore has implemented a Fixed-Price Credit 
low-carbon economy. To maintain a transparent,  Based (FPCB) tax mechanism where companies pay 
fair, and consistent price signal across the economy,  their carbon tax by surrendering non-tradeable, fixed-
the carbon tax is applied uniformly to all sectors  price carbon credits purchased from the Government. 
including energy-intensive and trade-exposed  The FPCB mechanism puts in place key building 
sectors, without exemption.  blocks that help regulatory bodies and companies  The carbon tax plays a key role in supporting Singapore’s climate actions.
build up necessary capabilities to operate in a linked 
Coverage market, should we decide to do so in the longer term.
The tax applies to direct emissions from facilities 
emitting 25 ktCO e or more in a year, covering  As there may be benefits in linking our carbon tax 
2
carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide,  framework to other jurisdictions, Singapore will 
sulphur hexafluoride, hydrofluorocarbons and  continue to monitor international developments, 
perfluorocarbons. This covers around 80% of  and study how we can leverage robust international 
Singapore’s total emissions. The carbon tax does not  market mechanisms to complement our domestic 
apply to transport fuels, for which there already are  mitigation efforts and position Singapore as an 
excise duties to encourage the reduction of their use. international hub for carbon trading.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 80 81 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Mitigating hydrofluorocarbon  EMERGING  
emissions from refrigeration 
use of waste-based feedstock, such as incineration 
and air-conditioning  TECHNOLOGICAL 
ash, thus contributing to Singapore’s waste 
reduction efforts. Captured CO  can also be used 
2
Cooling solutions will be increasingly vital to keep 
SOLUTIONS as feedstock for chemicals and synthetic fuels, such 
Singapore liveable given rising temperatures. 
as kerosene and methanol, which have the potential 
HFCs have high Global Warming Potentials 
to be used as fuel for aircraft and marine vessels. 
(GWPs), and are commonly used as refrigerants 
in refrigeration and air-conditioning (RAC) 
Preliminary findings show that the potential for 
equipment and systems. Singapore has developed 
CCUS to reduce Singapore’s emissions in the 
a comprehensive package of HFC mitigation 
long-term is significant, but there are near-term 
measures to reduce HFC emissions from RAC  To realise our LEDS aspiration, we will need to  challenges to deploy CCUS solutions at a large scale: 
equipment. This includes introducing a voluntary  harness emerging technological solutions that 
label for climate-friendly refrigerants that will help  can achieve mitigation outcomes beyond our  i)  Singapore does not have any known suitable 
consumers to identify and select RAC models that  existing range of mitigation options, such as CCUS  geological formations for the permanent storage 
use climate-friendly refrigerants. and low-carbon hydrogen. Whilst such solutions  of CO  underground. We will need to explore 
2
have been conceptually proven, their large-scale  partnerships with companies and other countries 
deployment in Singapore is currently limited by  with such geological formations in order to 
economic, institutional, and technical constraints.  leverage CO storage opportunities; and
2 
Restrict the supply of refrigeration and  We will continue to evaluate such technologies 
air-conditioning equipment that use  and invest in R&D initiatives to facilitate the cost- ii) Costs are still high currently, in part due to 
hydrofluorocarbons with high Global  effective application of such technologies.  the substantial amount of energy needed to 
Warming Potential separate and concentrate CO  from emissions of 
The voluntary labels for refrigerators (top)  2
and air-conditioners (bottom) using climate- industrial facilities and power plants. In addition, 
From 2022, a restriction will be imposed on the  friendly refrigerants. manufacturing fuel and chemicals from CO  
2
supply of commercial water-cooled chillers 28 and  is more energy-intensive than conventional 
Carbon capture, utilisation 
household refrigerators that use refrigerants with  processes, although this will improve over time 
and storage
GWP above 15, and household air-conditioners  Mandatory recovery and reclamation   as the technology matures.
that use refrigerants with GWP above 750.  or destruction of spent refrigerants 
CCUS has the potential to reduce emissions from  Researchers and companies around the world 
The recovery, reclamation or destruction of spent  Singapore’s industrial and power sectors. CO are actively working to reduce the costs by 
2 
Training and certification of technicians  refrigerants will be mandatory from 2021. This  emissions from power plants and industrial  developing new catalysts and novel chemical 
will apply to household air-conditioners and  facilities can be captured, and either stored in  pathways to capture and utilise CO . We will build 
2
A training and certification programme will be  refrigerators at the first instance, and will be  suitable sub-surface geological formations (i.e.  on our strengths in material science, chemical 
introduced to improve the proficiency of RAC  extended to commercial water-cooled chillers from  CCS) or converted into usable products (i.e. CCU).  engineering and computer science to develop 
technicians on proper installation, maintenance  2022. The recovered refrigerants can be reclaimed  CO can be used to produce carbonate-based  research, development and demonstration 
2 
and decommissioning of RAC equipment to  and reintroduced into the market or destroyed to  building materials, through a reaction called  initiatives and facilitate the cost-effective 
reduce the likelihood of refrigerant leakages.  prevent emissions. mineralisation. Mineralisation processes can make  application of CCUS for Singapore.
28  With a capacity of at least 1,055 kW for air-conditioning. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 82 83 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 4     |     Key Long-Term Climate Actions
Hydrogen
Hydrogen is a versatile energy carrier and  However, key challenges remain. While the cost 
industrial feedstock. It is currently mainly  of producing low-carbon hydrogen is decreasing, 
produced by reacting fossil fuels with steam or  it is still higher than the cost of conventional 
controlled amounts of oxygen (e.g. reforming or  hydrogen. In addition, a global and diverse supply 
gasification), or by splitting water (i.e. electrolysis),  chain for hydrogen has yet to be established. 
and is used primarily as a feedstock for a range of  The development of infrastructure to support 
industrial processes.  hydrogen production, transportation, storage and 
use will also entail significant costs. 
We are studying the technical and economic   
Captured CO feasibility of importing low-carbon hydrogen and  Nonetheless, we are optimistic that solutions 
2
Power plant /  its use in potential downstream applications.   can be found to overcome these challenges. 
Industrial facility CO  Utilisation 
2 Low-carbon hydrogen produced from increasingly  Technological advancements in low-carbon 
cost-competitive renewable electricity or fossil  hydrogen production and use, as well as 
fuels with CCUS can facilitate our industry sector’s  the commitment of many governments and 
Building Materials Fuels  Chemicals  decarbonisation. The use of low-carbon hydrogen  companies to pursue the wider use of hydrogen 
can also add diversity to our fuel mix across a  point to an increasingly positive outlook for 
number of energy applications such as electricity  hydrogen to contribute to Singapore’s long-term 
generation and transport.  decarbonisation efforts.
CO  Storage
2
POWER  ALTERNATIVE FUEL 
Depleted Oil  GENERATION  AND FEEDSTOCK 
and Gas Fields  e.g. gas turbines  FOR INDUSTRY
Geological  and fuel cells
Storage
Saline Aquifers
LAND TRANSPORT,  MARITIME 
Carbon capture, utilisation and storage value chain ESPECIALLY  SECTOR 
HEAVY VEHICLES
Potential downstream applications of hydrogen in Singapore
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 84 85 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 5     |     Seizing Green Growth Opportunities
Chapter 5
Seizing Green 
DEVELOPING 
AND DEPLOYING 
Growth 
Investment in R&D
LOW-CARBON 
Research, innovation, and enterprise (RIE) are the 
Opportunities
cornerstones of Singapore’s national strategy to 
TECHNOLOGY
develop a knowledge-based, innovation-driven 
economy and society. Since 1995, the Government 
has set out five-year plans to develop Singapore into 
a global R&D hub. Public investment in R&D has 
grown from S$2 billion through 1995-2000 (National 
Technology Plan), to S$19 billion through 2016-2020 
(RIE2020). 
Under the National Research Foundation’s (NRF) 
Following Singapore’s early identification of  RIE2020 Plan, the Government is investing close 
clean technology as a strategic growth sector  to S$1 billion in R&D in the Urban Solutions and 
in 2007, we have strengthened our capabilities  Sustainability domain to tackle Singapore’s energy, 
Addressing climate change will be challenging but can also 
to grow as a global hub for the development  water, land and liveability challenges. Investments 
present opportunities. We aim to develop an ecosystem, 
of clean and low-carbon technologies. We  under RIE2020 build on earlier investments in R&D 
supported by green finance and active R&D that nurtures  have established multiple research institutes,  to enhance the living environment and address the 
built up a pool of skilled local expertise,  country’s resource constraints. Following a mid-
the development and adoption of low-carbon innovations. 
cultivated a conducive business environment  term review of RIE2020, an additional S$144 million 
With such an ecosystem, we can seize green growth  and established a comprehensive suite of  was allocated to the Singapore Food Story R&D 
supporting services and opportunities for  Programme. The programme seeks to support R&D 
opportunities, grow our economy and create new jobs 
firms and researchers. These efforts contribute  in sustainable urban food production, production of 
as we transit to a low-carbon economy. At the same time, 
to a vibrant ecosystem that will spur the  future foods such as alternative proteins, as well as 
we will help create green solutions that have application  development of innovative low-carbon solutions  food safety science and innovation. NRF is working 
suitable for urban environments.  with partner agencies and stakeholders on the next 
beyond our shores. 
five-year plan (RIE2025).
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 86 87 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 5     |     Seizing Green Growth Opportunities
Energy Grid 2.0  Developing  
research capabilities
Over the next five years, Singapore will be 
investing S$55 million in Energy Grid 2.0. 
We aim to build up the research capabilities 
Energy Grid 2.0 is the next generation grid 
and innovation capacity of our universities 
system that will transform how energy supply 
and companies to drive economic 
and demand are managed, by consolidating 
growth and address national challenges. 
gas, solar, thermal, and other sources of 
Developing cutting-edge technologies 
energy into a single intelligent network that is 
requires collective effort, bringing together 
more efficient, sustainable, and resilient. The 
the expertise and resources of academia, 
research for Energy Grid 2.0 will focus on power 
industry, and the Government.
distribution, district cooling, and the design, 
intelligence, management, and optimisation of 
energy systems. 
To push the boundaries of innovation in the 
energy sector, NRF and the Energy Market 
Authority (EMA) launched two consortia in 2019 
under the Energy Grid 2.0 Programme and 
The NTU WTERF is equipped to undertake waste-to-energy and waste-to-resource processes and able  have set aside up to S$9 million over three years 
to produce syngas to power the plant and slag that can be used for construction.  for both consortia. The Smart Grid and Power 
Electronics Consortium Singapore (SPECS) and 
the Cooling Energy Science and Technology 
Singapore (CoolestSG) Consortium will bring 
WTE Research Facility 
together research institutes, companies, and 
the Singapore Government to develop solutions 
As Singapore moves to become a Zero Waste Nation, a vibrant R&D ecosystem will be necessary 
in smart grid and green cooling. 
to close the resource loops at the individual, industry, and district level. 
Recognising that testing prototypes at existing waste-to-energy facilities will not be feasible, the 
National Environment Agency (NEA) is co-funding the construction of a WTE Research Facility 
(WTERF) with the Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (NTU Singapore) Nanyang 
Environment and Water Research Institute (NEWRI). The S$40 million facility houses a slagging 
gasification plant that converts waste collected from NTU Singapore into electricity and other by-
products. The WTERF provides researchers and interested companies a platform that supports 
experimentation and test-bedding at scale, bridging the gap between research  
and commercial deployment. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 88 89 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 5     |     Seizing Green Growth Opportunities
Institutes working on green technologies in Singapore
Government research arm International research and innovation hubs
•  Agency for Science, Technology and Research  •  Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and 
(A*STAR): A*STAR is a statutory board under  Technology (SMART): SMART is a major research 
the Ministry of Trade and Industry. It houses  enterprise established by the Massachusetts 
research institutes that conduct a wide range  Institute of Technology (MIT) in partnership 
Academia and research institutes
of basic, applied and translational research and  with NRF. SMART’s research areas include urban 
development activities to create economic growth  mobility, low energy electronics, environmental 
•  Energy Research Institute @ NTU Singapore  •  Solar Energy Research Institute of 
and jobs for Singapore. It integrates the relevant  sensing and modelling. 
(ERI@N), which includes the Experimental  Singapore (SERIS): Based in NUS, SERIS 
capabilities of its research institutes with those 
Power Grid Centre: ERI@N develops industry- conducts industry-oriented research in solar  •  Cambridge Centre for Advanced Research and 
of local Institutes of Higher Learning (IHLs), to 
oriented innovations and trains specialists in  energy conversion, collaborates with industry  Education (CARES): CARES is the University of 
build strategic partnerships with multi-national 
clean energy. Its focus areas include wind and  players and trains specialists for the solar  Cambridge’s only research centre outside the 
corporations and globally competitive companies 
marine renewables, green buildings, e-mobility,  energy sector. Main areas of R&D include  United Kingdom that focuses on addressing carbon 
that drive research and innovation. A*STAR 
energy storage and fuel cells.  novel high-efficiency solar technologies such  reduction and energy efficiency in the industry 
also partners with local companies to promote 
as tandem solar cells, as well as solar energy  sector. CARES’ research programmes include 
productivity and nurtures R&D-driven start-ups. In 
•  Nanyang Environment and Water Research  systems such as floating photovoltaics and  the Cambridge Centre for Carbon Reduction in 
addition, A*STAR’s research contributes to societal 
Institute: Based in NTU Singapore, NEWRI  building integrated photovoltaics. Chemical Technology that focuses on reducing 
benefits such as improving outcomes in healthcare, 
promotes interdisciplinary interaction and  carbon emissions from the chemical industry, and 
urban living, and sustainability. Examples of such 
a contiguous value chain from research to  •  NTU-Singapore CEA Alliance for Research  the eCO EP programme for studying how industrial 
2
capabilities include power distribution, sustainable 
translation, development and application. Its  in Circular Economy (NTU-SCARCE): NTU- CO  may be reused in the chemical industry  
2
manufacturing, and clean energy
research areas include urban heat island effect,  SCARCE is a joint research centre by NTU  supply chain. 
WTE, energy efficiency in waste and wastewater  Singapore and the French Alternative Energies 
•  Evonik (SEA) Pte Ltd Asia Research Hub:  
treatment, and energy from bioprocesses.  and Atomic Energy Commission (CEA). The 
This is the first regional hub operated by German 
NTU-SCARCE research centre focuses on 
speciality chemicals manufacturer Evonik. The 
•  Energy Studies Institute (ESI): Based in the  formulating advanced e-waste separation and 
institute conducts research on resource efficiency 
National University of Singapore (NUS), ESI  extraction techniques that are more eco-friendly 
topics, functional surfaces, additive manufacturing 
conducts research and promotes discussion on  and energy-efficient than current methods. It 
and tissue engineering.
energy policy development. It focuses on energy  also looks into developing eco-friendly methods 
economics, energy efficiency, climate change  to recycle lithium ion batteries, and extract 
mitigation and adaptation, environmental  up to 75% of rare earth metals such as cobalt, 
sustainability, and energy security.  nickel, lithium and manganese.
•  Singapore Energy Centre (SgEC):  
SgEC is a consortium founded by NTU, 
NUS and other founding members such as 
ExxonMobil. The centre focuses on both 
technological and socioeconomic issues in 
sustainable energy development. 
The NTU-SCARCE research centre will draw on the research  Over the last decade, SERIS has trained more than 110 PhD 
capabilities from NTU Singapore and CEA. students. Many of them are now contributing to Singapore’s solar 
energy sector, and some have founded their own start-ups.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 90 91 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 5     |     Seizing Green Growth Opportunities
Test-bedding new  Singapore as a 
technologies
living laboratory
Singapore offers an enabling environment, 
for example by offering regulatory sandboxes, 
to encourage companies and research 
institutes to develop, test and assess green 
technologies under real-world conditions 
without compromising the environment, 
public health and safety. The test-beds 
facilitate the commercialisation process for 
•  NTU offshore hybrid microgrid:   •  Zero Energy Building @ Building and 
new technologies. These technologies can 
The first in the region, NTU Singapore’s offshore  Construction Authority (BCA):  
then be scaled up and exported to other 
hybrid microgrid on Pulau Semakau has over  The Zero Energy Building is a test-bedding facility 
cities requiring similar solutions. Located 
4,500 m² of solar panels alongside a 14-storey  with net-zero energy consumption that was 
around the island, these test-beds position 
high long-span wind turbine, generating  conceived to test the integration of green building 
Singapore as a “living laboratory” to evaluate,  •  Jurong Innovation District: 
enough electricity to power 45 four-room  technologies in existing buildings, and to serve as 
pilot and commercialise innovative solutions    An advanced manufacturing hub and a leading 
apartment units a year. Under its Renewable  a hub for practitioners and students in the study 
for Asian and global markets.  model for a sustainable, smart, connected 
Energy Integration Demonstrator – Singapore  of energy efficiency and green buildings.
mixed-use district in Singapore. 
(REIDS) initiative, several hybrid microgrids 
will be developed in the coming years, with 
each producing stable and consistent power 
in the half-megawatt range, which is suitable 
for small islands, isolated residential areas, and 
emergency power supplies. The microgrids will 
eventually occupy over 64,000 m2 of land or 
roughly about nine soccer fields.
•  NTU Smart Campus:  
Home to vast arrays of solar panels producing 
over 5,000 kWp, it is also a living test-bed. NTU 
•  JTC CleanTech One:  Singapore targets to achieve a 35% reduction 
  Completed in 2012, JTC CleanTech One is the  in energy, water and waste intensity by 2020, 
first development located in Singapore’s first  making it one of the world’s most eco-friendly 
eco-business park, CleanTech Park @ Jurong  university campuses in the world. A model of 
Innovation District. The park and its buildings  sustainable living, NTU Singapore has 57 Green 
serve as a living lab for companies and industries  Mark-certified building projects of which 95% 
to test-bed innovations and sustainable solutions.  are certified as Green Mark Platinum.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 92 93 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 5     |     Seizing Green Growth Opportunities
•  Energy and Environmental Sustainability  •  Floating Solar PV Pilot:   •  Zero-Waste Management System:  •  Airbitat Cool Bus Stop: 
Solutions for Megacities:   A joint project between the Singapore Economic    This is a pilot project for on-site WTE treatment at    This project aims to make use of data analytics 
This is a collaborative programme between  Development Board (EDB) and PUB, the pilot  Gardens by the Bay. The system, which reduces  and sustainable deep cooling technology, with 
Shanghai Jia Tong University and NUS to test  test-bed aims to assess the feasibility and cost  carbon emissions by up to 20%, harvests energy  Internet of Things (IoT) control for bus stops. 
eco-solutions for environmental sustainability  effectiveness of installing floating solar PV systems  from the gasification process to heat water that  Developed by Innosparks, an Open Innovation 
in urbanised spaces. Its projects include  on freshwater reservoirs. Given positive results  is used by food and beverage tenants at this  Lab of ST Engineering, the cool bus stop is 
synthesising fuel from alternative energy  from the test-bed, PUB will be deploying two  attraction. The facility also produces solid carbon  equipped with an air-cooling and filtration system 
sources and examining contaminants in the  1.5 MWp systems at Bedok and Lower Seletar  material for possible horticultural R&D, thus  that is embedded in seating columns. Delivering 
urban environment.  Reservoirs by the end of 2020. A 60 MWp solar  closing the waste loop and removing the need to  air that is cooled to 24°C through evaporation, this 
PV system will be deployed on Tengeh Reservoir  transport waste to incineration plants. technology results in energy savings of up to 70% 
by 2021. The power generated from this system  compared to the average air conditioner of an 
alone is sufficient to meet the energy needs of all  equivalent capacity. A similar air-cooling system 
our water treatment plants at local reservoirs. With  was previously deployed in Resorts World Sentosa 
this, Singapore’s waterworks will be one of the few  and the Singapore Zoo.
in the world to be 100% green. When completed, 
it will be one of the largest of its kind in the world, 
spanning 45 football fields
•  Punggol Digital District (PDD):  
Powered by an Open Digital Platform, PDD 
will be Singapore’s first business park to offer 
•  CETRAN Autonomous Vehicle (AV) test centre:  businesses and students a ‘plug-and-play’ digital 
Spanning two hectares, the CETRAN AV test  infrastructure with district-level data to conduct 
centre was launched in 2017 to spearhead the  rapid prototyping and technological solutions in a 
development of testing requirements for AVs.  real-world setting. Besides being a car-lite district, 
Operated by NTU scientists, it comes equipped  smart innovations will be used in PDD to reduce 
with elements of Singapore’s roads, with common  carbon emissions and make buildings 30% more 
traffic schemes, road infrastructure, traffic rules,  energy-efficient. The estate will also boast a smart 
and even a rain simulator and flood zone to test  energy grid, fitted with solar panels and smart 
AVs’ navigation abilities under different   meters, which will manage power consumption of 
weather conditions. the whole estate in real time.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 94 95 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 5     |     Seizing Green Growth Opportunities
Sharing our solutions globally Sustainable power generation  
beyond Singapore
The environmental challenges that we face are 
Sunseap Group, a leading supplier of solar PV 
not unique to Singapore. Partnerships beyond 
systems based in Singapore, has established 
borders are crucial so that we can learn from 
regional operations in the Asia Pacific. Given the 
the experience and expertise of other countries, 
high potential for solar PV deployment in the region, 
while sharing ours as well. For example, the 
Sunseap Group has worked with infrastructure 
BCA Green Mark Scheme is an internationally 
development and investment companies to 
recognised green building rating system, 
develop solar projects abroad, such as solar farms 
notably in Asia, as it was developed specially 
in Cambodia (output of 10 MWp), India (output 
for the tropical climate. Since receiving 
of 140 MWp) and Vietnam (output of 168 MWp). 
applications for overseas developments in 
Beyond solar farms, Sunseap has plans to supply 
2006, BCA has certified over 100 overseas 
floating solar plants to countries in the region, as 
projects under the BCA Green Mark Scheme. 
land is becoming a premium in Southeast Asia. 
We also welcome innovative partnerships with 
Sunseap’s 168 MWp solar farm in Ninh Thuan, Vietnam is one of the largest in the country. 
countries and institutions that share the same  Sunseap and InfraCo Asia contributed three billion Vietnamese dong (S$173,749) to fund the 
To support a low-carbon future, Sembcorp 
vision of a global circular economy and a low- construction of concrete roads surrounding the site. At peak construction period, the project 
Industries (Sembcorp), an integrated energy  created over 2,000 jobs, mostly for locals in the area.
carbon future. Although the ability to harness 
and urban player headquartered in Singapore, 
alternative energy sources at scale is limited 
has grown its global wind and solar renewables 
in Singapore, leaders in this field have chosen 
capacity to 2,600 MW by the end of 2019, with 
to base their operations here, tapping on the 
2,450 MW in markets overseas. 
local R&D capability talent pool to develop low-
carbon solutions that can be deployed.
While harnessing wind energy is not a viable option 
for Singapore, Sembcorp has 1,692 MW of wind 
assets in operation and under development across 
seven states in India. It currently has the highest 
renewable energy capacity under self-operation for 
an independent power producer in the market. In 
China, it has 725 MW of wind power projects. 
Beyond operational capabilities, Sembcorp has 
also harnessed technology as a key enabler and 
differentiator in its renewable energy offerings. The 
proprietary Virtual Brain platform developed for the 
wind farms in India is an example of how Sembcorp 
Sembcorp’s 250 MW wind energy project in Tamil Nadu is the first reverse 
uses data analytics and artificial intelligence to 
auction wind power project in India.
monitor and manage wind turbine assets remotely 
from a central location. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 96 97 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 5     |     Seizing Green Growth Opportunities
PROMOTING 
Developing green finance 
solutions and markets
SUSTAINABLE FINANCE
Investing and raising capital through green  Building on the ASEAN Green Bond Standards, the 
financial instruments, such as green bonds, have  2nd ASEAN Capital Market Conference launched 
grown significantly over recent years. These  the ASEAN Social Bond Standards and ASEAN 
investments into green sectors have promoted  Sustainability Bond Standards in October 2018 to 
new economic opportunities, such as in CleanTech  provide issuers and investors a wide-ranging set 
and other growth areas.  of green, social and sustainability bonds standards 
Finance is key to unlocking a global sustainable  Our financial institutions are also taking action to  that are aligned with international standards. These 
future, and serves as a force for good to  make financing practices more environmentally  To catalyse more green bond issuances,  standards provide guidance to ASEAN companies 
facilitate the transition to a green, low-carbon  responsible. Our local banks have implemented  Singapore launched a Green Bond Grant  seeking to raise financing through green, social and 
economy. Singapore aims to support the  policies aligned with the Guidelines on  Scheme in 2017 to level the costs associated  sustainability bonds, and raise the profile of ASEAN 
financial sector in mobilising global capital  Responsible Financing issued by the Association  with issuing green bonds compared to that  as a region that is committed to sustainable finance.
for the green economy and channelling them  of Banks in Singapore in 2015, to evaluate their  of a conventional bond, and to promote the 
to new investments in green businesses,  borrowers’ environmental, social, and governance  adoption of internationally accepted standards  To further promote environmentally sustainable 
technology, and infrastructure, which reduces  (ESG) risks, and help borrowers improve their  on sustainability. The scheme was renamed to  projects in Singapore and the region, Singapore 
emissions while creating jobs and growth  sustainability profiles. Several asset managers  the Sustainable Bond Grant scheme after its  launched the US$2 billion Green Investments 
opportunities. Our goal is to be a leading  in Singapore have signed the UN Principles for  expansion to include social and sustainability  Programme (GIP) in November 2019, which 
centre for Green Finance in Asia and globally. Responsible Investment and developed the  bonds in 2019. To date, more than S$6.5 billion  places funds with asset managers committed to 
Singapore Stewardship Principles for Responsible  of green bonds have been issued in Singapore.  drive regional green efforts out of Singapore and 
Investors. We will continue to work with the asset  contribute to other national green finance initiatives. 
management industry to foster good stewardship  To encourage green and sustainable bond issuances  As part of the GIP, Singapore will allocate US$100 
among investors and drive sustainable investment  in ASEAN, Singapore supported the development of  million to the Bank for International Settlements’ 
based on ESG considerations.  the ASEAN Green Bond Standards, which reference  Green Bond Fund, in support of its global green 
the International Capital Market Association  finance initiatives.
Building a financial system 
In 2016, in line with the practice of other leading  Green, Social and Sustainability Bond Standards. 
resilient to environmental risks
stock exchanges, the Singapore Exchange (SGX) 
introduced a requirement for its listed issuers 
The Monetary Authority of Singapore (MAS) has  to produce an annual sustainability report. In 
included banks’ sustainability practices in its  these reports, listed issuers must disclose ESG 
supervisory assessment. It aims to strengthen  parameters on a comply-or-explain basis. The 
banks’ efforts to integrate sustainability into their  number of SGX-listed issuers communicating 
business models and risk management functions.  their sustainability disclosures has increased 
Environmental risk management guidelines are  significantly, with almost all listed issuers 
being developed for the banking, insurance and  publishing their sustainability reports for 2018. 
asset management sectors to reinforce industry  Moving forward, SGX plans to provide more 
standards on governance, risk management and  guidance on ESG data disclosure to make such 
the disclosure of environmental risk.  data more meaningful for investors.
ASEAN capital market regulators launch social and sustainability bond standards.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 98 99 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 5     |     Seizing Green Growth Opportunities
ECONOMIC 
Supporting a greener global  photovoltaics to replace ordinary façade cladding,  a sustainability hub, leading international companies 
financial system GBIC has successfully partnered PSA Corporation  such as REC Solar and Neste, which produce solar 
to develop a Net Zero Energy Building as part of the  PVs and biofuels respectively, have chosen to set up 
TRANSITION  
Tuas Port. This building is projected to achieve energy  operations in Singapore. 
In addition to greening the financial landscape 
savings of 58% compared to if it had been designed 
in Singapore and across the region, collective 
TO A CARBON- to meet existing regulations. Singapore is also pursuing other green growth 
leadership and globally coordinated action will 
opportunities. For example, we are working to 
be necessary to advance the global agenda for 
We continue to promote energy efficiency in all  develop research, development and demonstration 
sustainable finance. Singapore actively contributes 
CONSTRAINED  our sectors, as it lowers business costs, increases  initiatives and facilitate the cost-effective application 
to these global efforts by participating in 
business competitiveness, and enhances our  of carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS) and 
international and multilateral organisations.
energy security. In particular, the Government is  low-carbon hydrogen for Singapore. As Singapore 
FUTURE
working with the industry sector to accelerate the  moves to become a Zero Waste Nation, we are 
MAS is one of the founding members of the 
adoption of energy-efficient technologies, and has  investing in R&D and collaborating with industry 
Network for Greening the Financial System, 
launched various schemes to support businesses  experts to develop new, more efficient and eco-
which aims to enhance the ability of the financial 
across different sectors. Success stories where  friendly ways to support a circular economy. 
system to manage the risks of climate change, 
businesses reaped significant energy and cost 
and mobilise capital for green and low-carbon 
Working towards a low-carbon future will be  savings demonstrate the positive results of investing  The Government will complement and catalyse these 
investments. MAS also actively participates in the 
challenging given Singapore’s high dependence on  in energy-efficient technology. efforts through key enablers such as standards, 
Sustainable Insurance Forum, which is a network 
international trade and export-oriented economy.  accreditation and a pro-enterprise regulatory 
for leading insurance supervisors and regulators 
Nonetheless, we believe that the efficient use of  To bridge the gulf between the laboratory and the  environment, as we continue to create green 
seeking to strengthen their understanding of and 
resources is essential in maintaining our economic  real world, Singapore’s Living Lab proposition brings  solutions for Singapore and the world. We will also 
responses to sustainability issues pertaining to the 
competitiveness and enabling sustainable economic  businesses, government agencies and research  continue efforts to seek to attract and anchor world-
insurance sector.
growth in an increasingly carbon constrained world.  institutes together to drive R&D and test-bed green  class investments in related fields, to capitalise on 
Singapore will continue to drive sustainability in  technologies under real-world conditions.  green growth opportunities.
SGX is a member of the Financial Stability Board’s 
our industries and pursue best-in-class resource 
Task Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosures 
efficiency standards. One promising area is in the development of clean 
(TCFD), which develops recommendations for 
energy technologies. As addressed earlier in this 
voluntary climate-related financial disclosures for 
As part of our ongoing industry transformation  chapter, Singapore is well-positioned to be a leading 
organisations. TCFD is actively promoting and 
efforts, the Government launched 23 sector-specific  CleanTech Hub. Businesses can use Singapore as a 
monitoring the adoption of its recommendations, 
Industry Transformation Maps (ITMs) covering about  springboard to serve the fast-growing markets in 
which were released in June 2017. 
80% of the Singapore economy to identify new  the region. Businesses can also leverage our skilled 
growth opportunities, increase productivity and  labour force, conducive business environment, 
drive innovation, while recognising the challenges  dedicated eco-business park and strong financial 
that each industry faces, including the need to  services, to develop and demonstrate new low-
be more energy and carbon efficient. In the Built  carbon solutions for use domestically and globally. 
Environment Cluster, one example where energy  In the solar industry alone, Singapore has grown the 
efficient technologies and solutions have been test- number of companies from just a handful in 2008 to 
bedded is BCA’s Green Buildings Innovation Cluster  about 50 local and international companies today. As 
(GBIC). Through the use of building-integrated  testament to our efforts in developing Singapore as 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 100 101 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 5     |     Seizing Green Growth Opportunities
Building the workforce  
of the future
NEWSand – turning trash into treasure
NEWSand was born out of our determination to  As we shift towards a low-carbon future, there 
overcome resource constraints and create new  will be new job roles created from the emerging 
products from what would otherwise have been  green economy, while some job roles today 
disposed in landfills. NEWSand refers to residues  may need to be transformed. To ensure that our 
from waste treatment, such as slag and incineration  workforce is well-equipped with the necessary 
bottom ash, which have been treated to meet a  knowledge and skills to take on these job roles, 
comprehensive set of environmental standards.  various initiatives have been put in place to 
NEWSand is environmentally safe for use as  upskill and reskill our workers.
construction material. Singapore has developed 
provisional environmental standards for the use of  The national SkillsFuture movement provides 
NEWSand, and field trials will begin in 2020.  support for Singaporeans to embrace lifelong 
learning and pursue skills mastery at different 
NEWSand will bring Singapore a step closer to  stages of their careers. Under the movement, 
closing our waste loop and further extend the  there are various opportunities for individuals to 
lifespan of Singapore’s only landfill. take up relevant training programmes to prepare 
themselves for the low-carbon future. Subsidies 
One of the courses in the Workforce Skills Qualification programme on carbon efficiency
are also available to help individuals offset the 
costs of such training. 
For instance, the Singapore Institute of  To help jobseekers to transit into new  While training our current workforce, Singapore 
Manufacturing Technology currently offers  jobs, Workforce Singapore offers reskilling  also works with the industry sector and 
a Singapore Workforce Skills Qualification  programmes such as Professional Conversion  institutes of higher learning to nurture our 
programme in “Integrated Carbon Footprint  Programmes (PCPs) and Place-and-Train  future generation and equip them with the 
Assessment Methodology”, which is supported  Programmes for rank-and-file workers. These  necessary skills and qualifications to tap on the 
by SkillsFuture Singapore to help reskill  programmes provide employers with training and  opportunities of a green economy. The A*STAR 
employees in the area of carbon efficiency. The  salary support to hire jobseekers who are looking  Graduate Academy provides scholarships and 
Government has also partnered the Singapore  to be reskilled for new jobs in different sectors  fellowships to enable young aspiring scientific 
Institute of Technology to offer carbon emission  or job roles. For PCPs alone, we have around 100  talent to pursue their passion in science, and 
assessment and training programmes under the  reskilling programmes across around 30 sectors.  prepare them for a rewarding career in R&D. 
new Energy Efficiency Technology Centre (EETC),  We continue to offer new reskilling programmes  Such initiatives will help to support a burgeoning 
which aims to upskill working professionals  as industries transform and shift towards a low- green growth industry and cultivate a talent pool 
with skillsets in energy assessment and drive  carbon future. keen to develop innovative green solutions for 
The 105m long footpath opposite Our Tampines Hub, 
awareness of energy best practices and new  Singapore and the world.
which links to the Darul Ghufran Mosque, is made from 
concrete which incorporates slag from processing  technologies amongst companies. 
municipal solid waste.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 102 103 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 6     |     Key Long-Term Adaptation Actions
Chapter 6
Singapore’s resilience framework
Key Long-Term  
To address the effects of climate change on Singapore’s physical environment effectively, we 
have already begun working on our long-term infrastructure adaptation plans. A multi-agency 
Adaptation Actions
Resilience Working Group (RWG), set up under the auspices of the Inter-Ministerial Committee 
on Climate Change (IMCCC), oversees the study and implementation of measures to address our 
physical vulnerabilities to climate change, and serves as the coordinating body on climate change 
adaptation efforts across government agencies.
The Government established a National Resilience Framework to guide RWG in identifying 
and assessing climate change risks and impacts, and formulating adaptation plans to address 
Singapore’s physical vulnerabilities.
Extreme climate conditions are likely to become more 
The Centre For Climate Research Singapore (CCRS) 
is responsible for undertaking research and studies 
intense and frequent in Singapore in future. Singapore  to improve scientiﬁc understanding of local climate 
and the effects of climate change on Singapore. 
B iiacnsade  hcpayelpaoimnbntacidalteit itp oeisehn ycsys hp tasaelinacnmdnag slape  att.ridoce aapapldalytrda ibnrteiugosi nllsdo  eoinnfugfgro-  tpuretphrsmy  c–sl  iiaimcnnafa rle tavfesuf etslrnccuteiecirvntaeucb reiel i ties  Pr oejteacmtiiolCns MEASURIMPELESMENMTONIRTEOVIR EAESSSSW CIANMAPDTAECGTSO ARNIDS VEU RLNISERKASBEIISLTIARNISAKLSYSFEORAMUDLATEAPTPATIAONTHWAYS CsliemidautteS  Reecsnilei TwacpwoRclldhnaiiohismmear uSiktc psnial ahnadtttetau sg efebrtsod as ireceori,pe e mhsutnsososase re pm heneaﬁdlda.rgane ctv neetnhheos  tetr  .s p uie  ttbCsronxukoaCa edissvRmd i ciiiesSdenlii sn nfemw ,oted tairiai n lcfn cltSy  lcledbiii mnoam eeplgn malrcaaaodtotb peje wnceo o cptacirrihtttranehieoato’us ngijanoei nglodsconger vtn wwii  aisiogmthienns-tit cp hcsee h airtsc ms t s  
response to climate change can only be achieved  in climate science.
PRIORITISE
ADAPTATION
through the collective action of the government,  MEASURES
Adaptation planning by formulating options 
individuals, businesses and the community.
to tackle the risks identiﬁed in a dynamic and 
ﬂexible manner.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 104 105 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 6     |     Key Long-Term Adaptation Actions
Building Singapore’s climate 
science capabilities
Driving research in climate science
Having robust climate science capabilities  Convective-scale Numerical Weather 
will strengthen our understanding of the  Prediction model (SINGV) A new Climate Science Research Programme Office will be set up in CCRS to 
effects of climate change on Singapore and  lead and drive efforts to formulate and implement our National Climate Science 
the region, and enable us to identify the most  Many weather models are developed for the  Research Masterplan, and strengthen local capabilities for climate science in 
appropriate adaptation measures to build up  temperate regions and hence, not customised to  the tropics. The Programme Office will focus on five key research areas with 
our climate resilience.  our local conditions. CCRS is undertaking cutting- significant impact on Singapore: 
edge research to develop weather models tailored 
We have been systematically building up  to Singapore. One such model is a convective- (i) sea level rise; 
our climate science capabilities. The Centre  scale Numerical Weather Prediction model known  (ii) the impact of climate change on our water resources and flood management; 
for Climate Research Singapore (CCRS) was  as “SINGV”. The SINGV will allow us to provide  (iii) the impact of warming trends on human health and the energy sector; 
established in 2013 to develop research  prediction of heavy rainfall at longer lead times  (iv) the impact of climate change on our biodiversity and food security; and 
expertise in the climate of Singapore and  and over higher spatial resolutions. Today, we  (v) cross-cutting areas.
Southeast Asia, and has since grown to be one  can provide advance warnings of heavy rains 
of the region’s most advanced tropical climate  about 15-30 minutes before the downpour. With 
research centres. Some of the key research  this model, the Meteorological Service Singapore 
works by CCRS are:  (MSS) will be able to provide an earlier assessment 
of the risk of heavy rain, giving us more time to 
prepare for flash floods.
Second National Climate Change Study (V2) 
In 2015, CCRS published results from the Second 
National Climate Change Study V2 which analysed  Other institutes have also been established to 
future climate change scenarios for Singapore  support climate research, such as the Tropical 
and the Southeast Asian region at high spatial  Marine Science Institute in 1996 for research, 
resolution. The findings from this study provide  development and consultancy on tropical 
the scientific basis to inform Singapore’s current  marine science and environmental science, and 
climate adaptation plans. CCRS is currently  the Earth Observatory of Singapore in 2009 for 
working on the Third National Climate Change  research on earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, 
Study V3, and the results are expected to be  tsunamis and climate change in Singapore and 
released in 2022. Southeast Asia.
One of the key research focus areas of the Climate Science Research Programme Office is 
sea level rise. This is one of the most critical effects of climate change for Singapore, due to 
the size of the threat, the associated costs and long-term consequences.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 106 107 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 6     |     Key Long-Term Adaptation Actions
Singapore’s   Risk #1: 
adaptation measures Protecting our coasts
As a low-lying island city-state, Singapore is  Engineering solutions
The Government has implemented a variety of 
particularly vulnerable to rising sea levels. Coastal 
adaptation measures to enhance our climate 
areas are vital for Singapore to carry out shipping  Today, 70% to 80% of Singapore’s coastline is 
resilience and to minimise the adverse impacts 
activities as a major shipping port.  protected against erosion by hard structures 
of climate change on the community, economy 
such as stone revetments or vertical seawalls. 
and our daily lives. Singapore’s Climate Action 
CCRS has considered that in the rare scenario of  We will continue to explore alternative coastal 
Plan: A Climate-Resilient Singapore, For a 
high mean sea levels, high tide and high surge all  protection solutions that are applicable to 
Sustainable Future published in 2016 details how 
occurring at the same time, sea levels could rise  Singapore’s context and adapt them to our needs. 
Singapore may be affected by climate change 
almost 4m above the current mean and cause  For example, we are building a small polder at 
and our strategy to prepare for its effects. 
flooding in low-lying coastal areas in Singapore.  Pulau Tekong to gain experience operating one. 
Given these risks, we are now undertaking a  The polder comprises a dike that protects the low-
comprehensive effort to protect our coasts, low- lying tract of reclaimed land from the sea, and a 
lying areas and our communities, and carefully  network of drains and pumps to keep the land 
Geo-bags at East Coast Park. The geo-bags, which blend 
studying the options and strategies for protection  dry. This land is buffered from the sea by the dyke 
in with the beach environment, are used to prevent beach 
along different parts of our coastline.  and a network of drains and pumps will control  erosion while still allowing for public access.
the water levels in the polder.
These coastal protection plans may include 
a combination of conventional engineering  We have raised the minimum platform levels 
technologies such as sea walls, tidal gates, pumping  for new developments from 3m to 4m above 
stations as well as nature-based solutions. These are  the Singapore Height Datum (SHD) since 2011. 
necessary long-term investments and will possibly  Presently, critical infrastructure on existing 
cost Singapore S$100 billion or more over the  coastal land, notably Changi Airport Terminal 5 
next 50 to 100 years. The Government will create a  and Tuas Port, will be constructed with platform 
Coastal and Flood Protection Fund, with an initial  levels at least 5m above SHD. Low-lying roads 
injection of S$5 billion to provide for the substantial  near coastal areas such as Changi have also been 
capital outlay in implementing coastal and flood  raised to protect them from rising sea levels.
protection measures. 
Recognising the importance of robust, flexible 
CCRS has set aside S$10 million for a National  and innovative engineering solutions, we 
Sea Level Research Programme to develop more  will tap on internationally recognised best 
Sloping revetment at Labrador Nature Reserve.  
robust projections of sea level rise and improve  practice coastal protection techniques that are  A revetment is a sloping structure built to absorb the 
our knowledge on how rising sea levels will affect  applicable to Singapore’s context and adapt  energy of incoming waves and prevent coastal erosion.
Singapore. For many of these measures, we will  solutions to our needs.
need to start implementing them now and stage 
them appropriately over the next 100 years. By 
planning early, we can phase in the necessary 
measures in a timely manner whilst spreading out 
the costs over many years.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 108 109 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 6     |     Key Long-Term Adaptation Actions
Nature-based solutions and conducting coastal cleanups. Hybrid  Risk #2: 
engineering solutions, integrating both hard 
Protecting our water supply  
To boost natural coastal defences such as  and soft innovations, have been employed 
and alleviating floods
mangroves, Singapore adopts hard and soft  to arrest scouring and coastal erosion. The 
engineering approaches to mitigate coastal  implementation of these initiatives will also be 
erosion and actively restore mangrove areas. The  carried out in partnership with the community. 
Wet seasons will become wetter and dry 
benefits are multi-fold – nature-based solutions 
seasons will become drier. Droughts may impact 
help to conserve our biodiversity, and more  As outlined in Chapter 4, wetlands provide key 
the reliability of or affect our water supply while 
importantly, contribute to climate mitigation and  ecosystem services in tackling climate change 
more intense and frequent rainfall increases the 
our ecological resilience. such as carbon storage, sequestration, and 
risk of flooding. 
the mitigation of floods and coastal erosion. 
Mangrove habitats in different areas of Singapore  Collectively, Sungei Buloh Wetland Reserve, 
will be enhanced and restored under various  Kranji Marshes and the upcoming nature park 
Protecting our water supply
initiatives. These include building a living  at Mandai Mangrove and Mudflat form an 
collection of native mangrove species in the  ecological network of wetlands in north-western 
We have diversified Singapore’s water supply 
Mangrove Arboretum of Sungei Buloh Wetland  Singapore. Another new nature park at Khatib 
through the Four National Taps, namely local 
Reserve, restoring mangroves at abandoned  Bongsu in the northeast will complement this 
Singapore’s first NEWater plant, which is located in Bedok, 
catchment water, imported water, NEWater and 
aquaculture ponds in south-eastern part of Pulau  network to enhance Singapore’s climate and 
began operations in 2002. 
desalinated water. In particular, NEWater and 
Ubin, mangrove restoration and enhancement  ecological resilience.
desalinated water are less dependent on rainfall 
at the Mandai Mangrove and Mudflat, and 
and are thus more resilient against dry weather.
the north-eastern coastline of Pulau Tekong 
We have launched Singapore’s fifth NEWater 
plant at Changi in 2017, and opened our third 
desalination plant, the Tuas Desalination Plant 
in 2018. Our fourth and fifth desalination plants 
will be built in Marina East and Jurong Island 
respectively by 2020.
Managing demand is just as important to ensure 
Singapore’s long-term water sustainability. 
Singapore has adopted a multi-faceted approach 
towards water conservation, including mandating 
The Tuas Desalination Plant is the first in Singapore to be 
water efficiency standards, and engaging 
fitted with solar panels, with more than half of the total 
businesses and consumers alike on water 
roof area covered by solar panels. The 1.2 MWp solar PV 
conservation practices. Singapore also prices 
system will meet all of the energy needs of the plant’s 
water to reflect its scarcity value.  administrative building.
Mangroves are a key element of nature-based solutions for climate change. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 110 111 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 6     |     Key Long-Term Adaptation Actions
THE SOURCE−PATHWAY−RECEPTOR APPROACH
Risk #3: 
GREEN  
ROOF
Enhancing Climate and  
SOURCE
Ecological Resilience Through 
Developments with land size of 0.2 hectares or  DETENTION
TANK
more have to implement on-site measures, such  Greenery and Biodiversity 
as detention tanks and green roofs, to slow down 
RETENTION POND Conservation Management
runoff entering the public drainage system.
RAIN GARDEN
SEA
PATHWAY
PUB widens and deepens existing drains and canals, 
otarn bkusi ltdos c daipvteurrseio enx ccaenssa lrsu annodff  cfreonmtr ainlitseends dee rtaeinnftaiolln.  CDTAEENNTETKNRSTAILOISNE D  DCAIVNEARLSION  Ensuring a healthy ecosystem
CANAL  Singapore’s biodiversity may be at risk with 
IMPROVEMENT
long-term changes in temperature and rainfall, 
With climate change, critically endangered species such 
and with more extreme weather. Strengthening 
as the Spotted Wood Owl may be at greater risk.
RECEPTOR
our ecological resilience will help ameliorate 
MINIMUM 
PLATFORM 
To address ﬂood risks, PUB has stringent requirements  AND CREST  the effects of climate change. To achieve a 
LEVELS
for the entrance levels of basements and underground 
sustainable urban ecosystem, we need to  using technology to collect and analyse data 
facilities as well as minimum height requirements for  FLOOD  
BARRIER
the general ground level. Other examples of “receptor”  maintain our network of nature reserves, nature  (e.g. through SGBioAtlas, a mobile application 
solutions include ﬂood barriers.
parks, parks, streetscapes, Nature Ways and  that the public can use to share their nature 
RESERVOIR
green spaces. This network is home to diverse  sightings with NParks) and data analytics tools, 
flora and fauna that is beneficial to human  and applying ecological modelling to facilitate 
Enhancing our flood resilience to better predict and manage heavier rainfall,  well-being and contributes to the resilience of  science-based decision-making.
giving more lead time to mobilise Quick Response  our wider urban ecosystem. We will carry out 
To increase our flood resilience, Singapore employs  Teams to areas at risk of flash floods. recovery plans for over 70 additional animals  Singapore has increased its green spaces, 
the Source-Pathway-Receptor approach, which  and plant species, and enhance 30 hectares of  intensified multi-layered roadside planting, 
looks at catchment-wide solutions to achieve  As part of the City in Nature vision, the National  forest, marine, coastal and ecological habitats  and mandated that new developments in 
higher drainage and flood protection. This holistic  Parks Board (NParks) will also be working with PUB,  in at least half of our gardens, parks and  areas with high footfall must incorporate 
approach covers the entire drainage system, from  Singapore’s National Water Agency, to naturalise  streetscapes by 2030.  minimum greenery replacement. 
the pathway over which the stormwater travels (i.e.  more waterways and waterbodies in Singapore’s 
“Pathway”), to where the rainwater falls onto the  gardens and parks. Coastal and riverine parks  In addition, applied research in conservation  As highlighted in Chapter 4, more than a 
ground (i.e. “Source”) and the areas where floods  will also incorporate designs such as floodplains  biology and planning will support and feed  million trees will be planted under the “One 
may occur (i.e. “Receptor”). Singapore has spent  to protect our coastal and low-lying areas from  into our biodiversity conservation efforts.  Million Trees” movement over the next ten 
about almost S$2 billion since 2011 on drainage  sea level rise and flooding. The conservation and  Such research efforts include comprehensive  years, with ten trees to be planted for every 
improvement works to boost flood resilience, and  restoration of our mangrove forests also help to  surveys and long-term monitoring of  tree affected by developments across the 
plans to invest another S$190 million in 2020 to  dissipate waves and trap sediment, potentially  ecosystems and species, integrating  island. This will increase the number of trees in 
enhance flood resilience. The Government will also  serving as a flexible form of coastal defence while  disciplines, research and operations. We will  Singapore from seven million currently, to over 
invest in technology, including short-range radars,  preventing erosion. also strengthen our research capabilities by  eight million by 2030.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 112 113 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 6     |     Key Long-Term Adaptation Actions
Risk #4: 
Strengthening resilience  
Project Wolbachia – Singapore
in public health -  
Reducing risk of dengue 
Caring for our coral reefs The National Environment Agency (NEA) is 
conducting phased field studies to evaluate 
Rising sea surface temperatures, ocean  the use of male Wolbachia-carrying Aedes 
acidification, more intense rainfall and rising sea  As Singapore’s temperature and humidity  aegypti (Wolbachia-Aedes) mosquitoes to 
levels threaten the rich marine life in Singapore’s  increases, the likelihood of certain vector- suppress the urban Aedes aegypti mosquito – 
waters – that includes over 250 species of reef- borne diseases may also increase. Warmer  the vector of Dengue, Chikungunya and Zika 
forming hard corals, 200 species of sponges,   temperatures will result in higher transmission of  viruses in Singapore.
12 seagrass species and numerous crustaceans.  dengue due to the accelerated development of 
the Aedes mosquito and the shorter incubation  Male Wolbachia-Aedes mosquitoes do not bite 
The Sisters’ Islands Marine Park was established  period of the dengue virus. In fact, warmer  or transmit disease. When male Wolbachia-Aedes 
in 2014 as part of our efforts to protect and  temperatures was a key factor that contributed  mosquitoes mate with urban female Aedes aegypti 
conserve our marine biodiversity. The marine  to the surge in dengue cases in 2019. mosquitoes, the resulting eggs do not hatch. We 
park spans 40 hectares around Sisters’ Islands,  have achieved more than 90% suppression of 
and along the western reefs of St John’s Island  Singapore is undertaking a concerted effort  urban Aedes aegypti mosquito population at the 
and Pulau Tekukor. It covers a variety of habitats  to eradicate mosquito-breeding habitats and  study sites in two districts. 
including coral reefs, sandy shores and seagrass  suppress their population through regular 
areas. The marine park also serves as a platform  inspections and enforcement actions, and  As Project Wolbachia - Singapore expands to 
The lagoon at the Big Sister’s Island is home to some 
for outreach, educational and research activities  deploying innovative mosquito control methods  cover bigger areas, we will continue to develop 
of Singapore’s richest reefs.
related to our native marine biodiversity.  such as Gravitraps29 and Project Wolbachia.  automated technologies to improve efficiency and 
against erosion, sustain our fisheries, and serve  quality in the production and release of Wolbachia-
Since 2018, the marine park has been home to  as an important source of novel compounds  Aedes mosquitoes, such as the larvae counter and 
Singapore’s largest artificial reef habitat, which  from which biomedical projects are developed.  mosquito launcher.
consists of eight purpose-built reef structures 
that have been lowered onto the seabed. These 
structures are expected to contribute about 
1,000m² of additional reef area by 2030 and will 
complement our existing reef enhancement 
efforts. Healthy coral reefs protect our shores 
against erosion, sustain our fisheries, and serve 
as an important source of novel compounds 
from which biomedical projects are developed. 
The Mosquito Launcher is a lightweight device that  Male Wolbachia-Aedes mosquitoes being released  
allows field operators to carry more mosquitoes in a  at Nee Soon East.
single trip, thus reducing the release duration.
29  Gravitraps are cylindrical traps with a sticky inner surface designed to trap gravid female Aedes mosquitos for monitoring and pre-emptive purposes.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 114 115 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 6     |     Key Long-Term Adaptation Actions
Risk #5:  Risk #6: 
Strengthening   Keeping cool in a  
food security warming world
Presently, Singapore imports over 90% of  Higher ambient temperatures and high 
our food supply. With increasing frequency  humidity can lead to outdoor thermal 
of widespread extreme weather events and  discomfort and increased likelihood of heat-
water crises in food producing countries, the  Farming with technology induced health impacts such as heat rashes, 
global food market is volatile and Singapore is  heat cramps, heat exhaustion and heat stroke.
vulnerable to supply shocks.  Local aquaculture company, Aquaculture 
Centre of Excellence Pte Ltd (ACE), has  Singapore employs microclimatic modelling 
We will play our part to help alleviate the  developed a purpose-built closed  tools in planning new residential towns and 
challenge of global food security by developing  containment floating farm, known as the  estates, helping planners strengthen key 
and exporting climate resilient urban food  Eco-Ark. The patented Eco-Ark combines  wind corridors, optimise building layouts and 
solutions to the world. The Singapore Food  offshore and marine technologies with a  orientation for better natural ventilation, and 
Agency (SFA), established in 2019 as a statutory  recirculating aquaculture system to filter and  identify hotspots for enhanced greenery 
board under the Ministry of the Environment  treat seawater, kill pathogens and reduce the  placement. Green cooling and skyrise greenery 
and Water Resources (MEWR), leads the effort  farm’s vulnerability to external conditions. The  measures are also deployed to keep the public 
Companies like Sustenir Agriculture are part of the growing 
to strengthen food safety and food security  community of urban farmers. Eco-Ark’s capacity is 20 times more than the  cool in an energy-efficient manner.
in Singapore by diversifying import sources,  minimum productivity of Singapore’s coastal 
growing local and growing overseas.  fish farms today and needs only two workers  The increase in temperature due to urban heat 
to operate, thus contributing to Singapore’s   island effect is a complex topic and Singapore 
Singapore aims to develop the capabilities  food security. is studying this in greater depth. This includes 
and capacity to produce 30% of Singapore’s  investing in R&D, such as the Cooling Singapore 
nutritional needs locally by 2030. To achieve  project, as well as tapping on technology, to 
this vision, the agri-food industry will need to  develop strategies to address the urban heat 
transform itself to become highly productive,  island effect.
and employ climate resilient and sustainable 
technologies. In line with this target, S$144 
million has been allocated for the Singapore 
Food Story R&D Programme to support R&D 
in sustainable urban food production, future 
foods, as well as food safety science and 
innovation. Farmers can also tap on the S$63 
Barramundi Asia’s nursery extension is expected to  ACE leverages technology to produce sea-farmed 
million Agriculture Productivity Fund (APF) to  increase the company’s fish production to almost  fish in a climate resilient and sustainable manner.
co-fund the installation of advanced systems for  1.8 million fish fry per year.
enhanced production capabilities and support 
R&D of farming technologies.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 116 117 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 6     |     Key Long-Term Adaptation Actions Chapter 7     |     Involving the Whole Nation 
Risk #7:  Adaptation, mitigation and  Chapter 7
ecological resilience
Keeping our buildings  
and infrastructure safe
Adaptation, mitigation and ecological resilience 
Strong winds and higher temperatures  actions are synergistic. Strong mitigation  Involving the  
may compromise the safety and reliability  measures can reduce the need for and the cost 
of infrastructure. Our buildings have been  of adaptation measures in the long term while 
designed to resist wind forces, based on  initiatives to raise ecological resilience will 
Whole Nation
specifications in the Building Code against  enable us to rebound from the adverse effects 
extreme wind events. We also regularly review  of climate change. 
our building design codes and regulations to 
take into account, among other considerations,  Singapore recognises that mitigation, adaptation, 
the impact of climate change such as higher  and ecological measures must be jointly 
wind speeds and forces. undertaken to tackle climate change, and 
therefore pursues all three aspects as part 
As increased rainfall may exacerbate slope  of our national climate change strategy. This 
stability, Singapore will be conducting  goes beyond physical adaptation – an effective 
studies on the impact of climate change on  response to climate change can only be achieved 
slope stability and integrity, and exploring  through the collective action of the government, 
appropriate adaptation measures to enhance  individuals, businesses and the community. 
safety in this area. Meeting our low-emissions aspiration will 
require the full participation of and collaboration 
with individuals, civil society, academia, 
businesses, and the Government. 
We will create opportunities to catalyse more 
stakeholder partnerships to promote climate-
friendly actions across all sectors.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 118 119 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 7     |     Involving the Whole Nation 
Everyone – individuals, civil 
society, academia, businesses 
Citizen-centric approach 
and the Government – must 
play their part to contribute to  In a resource- and carbon-constrained world, 
we need to adopt a circular economy approach, 
Singapore’s transition to a low-
where scarce resources are valued and kept in use 
carbon, climate resilient city.  for as long as possible. By conserving resources 
through reducing, reusing, and recycling, we can 
Over 2,000 people visited the Youth4Climate Fest 2019  also reduce GHG emissions from production and 
and participated in various activities to learn about the  the incineration of waste. These will help mitigate 
importance of preserving our environment.
climate change.
The #RecycleRight Citizens’ Workgroup brought 
together citizens to co-create solutions to improve 
In 2019, the Government convened a  household recycling.
  Nation-wide activities to spur climate action Some highlights include:
#RecycleRight Citizens’ Workgroup. More than 
40 citizens from diverse backgrounds worked  Four pilot projects resulted from the workgroup’s 
  We designated 2018 as the Year of Climate Action  •  The Partners for the Environment Forum 2019, 
together to co-create solutions to improve the  recommendations. These were projects to 
to raise the level of national consciousness of the  organised by the Ministry of Environment and 
way households recycle in Singapore. Through  improve education and awareness-building 
need to take individual and collective action to  Water Resources (MEWR). The forum featured 
immersive learning and intense engagement  efforts at the community level, piloting a new 
fight climate change. Under the partnership efforts  local and foreign speakers sharing latest research 
sessions, the Workgroup came up with  design for recycling bins, researching the Deposit 
between the 3P (People, Private, Public) sectors,  and best practices in climate science, circular 
recommendations spanning several themes such  Refund Scheme, and facilitating the development 
over 800 climate action related events were  economy and 3P partnerships. 
as building awareness, community support, and  of an app to encourage consumers to reduce their 
organised. To date, more than 340,000 individuals, 
innovative product design. use of disposables.
educational institutions and organisations have  •  The Youth4Climate Fest 2019, organised by City 
pledged to take climate action. Developments Limited, in partnership with the 
This process provided citizen participants with a  As a key outcome from this process, it was 
  National Environment Agency (NEA), National 
deeper understanding of the recycling landscape  announced in March 2020 that NEA would 
  To sustain the momentum for climate action,  Parks Board (NParks) and ActiveSG. The event 
in Singapore, and forged a sense of shared  implement a Deposit Refund Scheme for 
we designated 2019 as the Year Towards Zero  provided a platform for youths to express 
purpose in improving household recycling in  beverage containers by 2022 (following industry 
Waste, aimed at promoting more sustainable  their passion for the environment through the 
Singapore. The Government will continue to  consultations in 2020) as the first phase of the 
consumption of resources, and the adoption of  performing arts. 
convene more engagement platforms to partner  Extended Producer Responsibility approach for 
circular economy initiatives. 
the community to come up with effective solutions. packaging waste management.
•  The Youth Dialogue on Climate Change Education, 
  An annual Climate Action Week has been initiated  organised by youths to find innovative solutions 
to promote the awareness of climate change and  to address climate change through education and 
to drive climate action in Singapore, with the  youth-led action. 
inaugural week held from 17 to 23 July 2019. 
•  The Ricoh Asia Eco Action Day Tree Planting, 
organised by Ricoh Asia Pacific, to mark the 
conclusion of their Eco Action Day campaign. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 120 121 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 7     |     Involving the Whole Nation 
Online platforms   Ground-up initiatives   Recognising sustainability champions
to spur climate action to spur climate action
The Government, NGOs and business associations 
are taking steps to recognise individuals and 
To reach a wider range of stakeholders, various  Beyond education and awareness, sustained  educational institutions and organisations to 
businesses who have championed or led 
online platforms have been set up to disseminate  behavioural change is essential for climate change  implement similar projects, increasing the reach and 
environmental advocacy efforts within their 
information on climate change, to collect public  action. Civil society groups and businesses are  impact of what began as a small initiative.
communities and workplaces.
feedback, and to encourage all stakeholders to play  increasingly coming forward to drive ground-
their part to combat climate change. up initiatives to rally businesses, households  With support from the Call for Ideas Fund, not-
Awards that showcase environmental best practices 
and individuals to take collective action for a  for-profit organisation Zero Waste SG launched a 
include the Energy Efficiency National Partnership 
Government websites, such as the National Climate  sustainable future.  “Bring Your Own Singapore” campaign in 2017 to 
(EENP), the Building and Construction Authority’s 
Change Secretariat’s (NCCS) website (www.nccs. encourage consumers to use their own reusable 
(BCA) Green Mark Awards, the Singapore 
gov.sg), MEWR’s website (www.mewr.gov.sg/topic/ For example, in November 2019, Sembcorp  items such as bags, bottles and containers. Since 
Environment Council’s Singapore Environmental 
climate-change) and NEA’s Energy Efficient Singapore  Industries piloted a mobile application (‘ezi’)  then, more than 400 retail outlets have joined the 
Achievement Awards and the BCA-SGBC Green 
microsite (www.e2singapore.gov.sg) host a wide  to help boost local recycling rates. Providing  campaign, saving approximately two million pieces 
Building Individual Award. There are also awards 
range of resources relating to climate change and  users with a recycling collection service at their  of plastic disposables and packaging. Buoyed by 
organised by various government agencies 
energy efficiency. The Climate Change SG Facebook  doorstep, the application also includes interactive  the success of this campaign, the 3P Partnership 
to recognise individuals and businesses who 
page (www.facebook.com/ClimateChangeSG)  educational elements to raise public awareness on  Fund further supported Zero Waste SG’s “Bring Your 
have achieved outstanding performance in the 
and MEWR’s Facebook page (www.facebook.com/ how to recycle right. Users are also rewarded for  Own Bag Singapore” campaign in 2019 to focus on 
sustainability domain, such as NEA’s EcoFriend 
MEWRSingapore) also serve as platforms for the  their recyclables with every successful collection. reducing plastic bag usage.
Awards and 3R Awards, and PUB, Singapore’s 
Government to engage the online community. 
National Water Agency’s Watermark Awards. 
The Government offers a variety of funds to  To foster more sustainability partnerships between 
Since 2011, NCCS has conducted a nation-wide  support ground-up initiatives that seek to address  the Government, industries and communities, we 
MEWR organises the biennial President’s 
survey every two years to gauge public perception  environmental challenges, including the 3P  will set up the Singapore Eco-Fund later in 2020, 
Award for the Environment, which is the highest 
and views on climate change. The latest survey  Partnership Fund, Water Efficiency Fund and Call  which will provide S$50 million over the next five 
environmental accolade for individuals, educational 
conducted between May and July 2019 showed  for Ideas Fund.  years to fund impactful sustainability projects. 
institutions and organisations that have made 
that public awareness of climate change and its  Projects eligible for funding could include, for 
outstanding contributions towards environmental 
impact was high among Singaporeans, and has risen  For instance, “Save That Pen”, an initiative by a  example, a community farm that offtakes food 
and water resource sustainability in Singapore.
through the years. The majority of respondents also  group of students from the National University of  waste from the nearby community for composting, 
agreed that collective action – taken together by  Singapore (NUS) that gives used pens and other  or an industry project to test-bed new sustainable 
the Government, businesses and individuals – was  stationery a new lease of life, was supported by the  technologies in an entire town. The Eco-Fund thus 
needed to address climate change.  Call for Ideas Fund. Discarded pens that are still  aims to enable the co-innovation, co-creation and 
usable are refilled and donated to underprivileged  co-investment in a sustainable Singapore. A new 
Despite the strong conviction expressed by six  students in Singapore and within the region, while  SG Eco Office will also be established to coordinate 
in ten respondents that individual action would  unusable ones are stripped of plastic and metal  sustainability efforts across Singapore.
make a difference, less than half of all respondents  parts and sent for recycling. “Save That Pen” not 
(48.3%) said they knew what to do to help address  only embraces the 3Rs concept and benefits 
climate change. This finding underscores the need  those in need, informational videos enable other 
for continued efforts to enhance outreach efforts 
to promote climate-friendly action and behaviour 
Winners of the President’s Award for the Environment 2019
in Singapore.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 122 123 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 7     |     Involving the Whole Nation 
Crowdsourcing ideas    Sustainability networks   Empowering youths  
to spur climate action to spur climate action to spur climate action
We regularly engage the public under a variety of    To spur ground-up actions, we partnered various  Youths are important agents of change, and schools  More sustainability programmes will be introduced 
platforms to gather feedback on government policies,  stakeholder organisations to amplify climate  are a key platform to educate and socialise the  in schools and community facilities, such as 
to crowdsource ideas and to co-create solutions. For  awareness and encourage the public and businesses  young on climate change and environmental issues.  OBS@Coney. These initiatives will integrate 
example, as outlined in Chapter 3, an extensive public  to take action. The Climate Action SG Alliance,  Our schools, through both formal curriculum and  green infrastructure, sustainability programmes, 
consultation exercise was conducted between July  formed in April 2018, aims to strengthen the narrative  complementary programmes, help build awareness  and curriculum design to inculcate positive 
and September 2019 on Singapore’s LEDS, which saw  on climate change and translate awareness into  of such issues and how individual actions can count  environmental values in youths, enabling them to 
about 2,000 members of the public, environmental  action. The Alliance brings together representatives  towards combatting climate change. At the primary  be agents of change in our communities. 
groups and companies contributing comments and  from businesses, NGOs and youth-led groups, with  school level, students learn basic concepts related 
suggestions on how Singapore can chart our own  the Senior Minister of State for Environment and  to global warming and environmental issues such as  Teachers play an important role in engaging 
sustainable path forward towards a low-carbon future.  Water Resources Dr Amy Khor acting as their Advisor.  pollution and deforestation during Science lessons.  students in these topics through inquiry-based 
They also learn about environmental conservation in  learning, and the use of real-world examples and 
The development of the Zero Waste Masterplan also    Key projects by the Alliance include:   Social Studies, for example through the 3Rs concepts. case studies. Beyond the classroom, students 
benefited tremendously from ideas from various    have opportunities to apply their understanding of 
key stakeholders including companies, NGOs,  •  Project Recycling Right — a series of videos to raise  At the secondary school level, students gain more  climate change to purposeful real-world projects 
households and youths. More than 250 companies  awareness on the need to reduce consumption of  in-depth scientific knowledge on topics such as  through the Applied Learning Programme30, 
were consulted through industry engagement  single-use plastics, and to recycle right.  carbon cycles, GHG emissions and their contribution  Values-in-Action Programme31, and Co-Curricular 
sessions, and over 5,000 households were surveyed  to global warming, as well as the effects of climate  Activities.32 Some student-initiated projects include 
through door-to-door surveys. An online public  •  Project Business — an online pledge to get  change in Geography. At the Pre-University level,  upcycling and repurposing unwanted items to 
consultation was conducted, where more than 1,300  individuals and companies to commit to ridding  students learn how anthropogenic activity influences  minimise wastage, and recycling food waste into 
contributions were received. In addition, eight focus  homes and offices of single-use plastics. Several  climate change, and the need for urgent climate  compost for use as fertiliser. Water rationing 
group discussions and dialogues were held — two of  organisations have committed to make sustainability  action in local and international contexts.  exercises are also regularly held in schools to instil 
which were co-facilitated by youth-led groups Zero  a part of their daily operations.  in youths the importance of conserving water, and 
Waste SG and LepakInSG. The “Love Your Food @ Schools” project between  to inculcate responsible water usage behaviour, as 
  Within civil society, non-profit environmental groups  2017 and 2019 brought students, staff, and school  we enhance our resilience against uncertainties 
such as Green Drinks and Climate Conversations  canteen stallholders in the entire food management  brought about by climate change.
regularly bring together like-minded activists,  loop, and encouraged proper segregation and 
academics and government representatives to  weighing of food waste to monitor reduction efforts.  BCA has been working with the Ministry of Education 
discuss climate change and sustainability issues. In  A food waste recycling machine was installed in  to explore the potential of Positive Energy Schools 
supporting and participating in such engagements,  ten schools. Everyone in these schools segregated,  through tapping on renewable energy and using 
we are able to gather diverse views from a wide range  weighed and recorded their food waste generated  energy-efficient innovations. Students will have the 
of stakeholders towards shaping Singapore’s climate  daily. The food waste was then deposited into the  opportunity to observe the technologies deployed in 
action strategies. food waste recycling machine to be converted into  their schools and learn about climate science and the 
compost for distribution to community partners. In  technologies available to create a greener and more 
addition, these schools organised events to spread  sustainable Singapore. 
the awareness of composting using the food waste 
recycling machine.
30  Applied Learning Programme is designed by schools to help students apply their learning in real world contexts
31  Values-in-Action Programme provides opportunities for students to learn about community issues and the needs of others, and carry out projects to 
contribute to improvements in school, at home or in the community.
32  Co-Curricular Activities are a core component of the holistic education in Singapore. These activities inculcate values and develop competencies, and at the 
same time foster social integration and deepen students’ sense of belonging, commitment and responsibility towards their school, community and nation.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 124 125 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 7     |     Involving the Whole Nation 
Catalysing businesses  
to spur climate action Recognition of sustainability efforts   Business perspective for carbon pricing
by businesses
Beyond compliance requirements, businesses 
The global trend towards corporate social 
In September 2019, five Singapore companies –  in Singapore have increasingly taken proactive 
responsibility has prompted many businesses 
CapitaLand Limited, City Developments Limited,  steps to use internal carbon pricing to account for 
to do their part to reduce emissions and care 
DBS Group Holdings, Sembcorp Industries and  climate risks in their investments and operations. 
for the environment. 
ComfortDelGro – saw their initiatives recognised 
by the Dow Jones Sustainability Index, which is  To facilitate private sector collaboration and 
Businesses have been proactive to adopt more 
regarded as a key reference for sustainability  support the business case for internal carbon 
resource-efficient practices, which not only reduce 
investment globally. While all five home-grown  pricing, the World Bank Group’s Carbon Pricing 
Tampines Secondary School is Singapore’s first positive  emissions but also help their corporate bottom 
companies were listed on the Asia Pacific index,  Leadership Coalition (CPLC) and the Global 
energy school with several innovative energy-saving  lines. For example, more than 200 organisations 
solutions such as vertical greenery, enhanced sunshades,  real estate developers CapitaLand Limited and  Compact Network Singapore (GCNS) jointly 
in Singapore have participated in the Singapore 
smart fans and solar panels. City Developments Limited were named on the  launched the first local chapter of the CPLC in 
Packaging Agreement, a joint initiative by the 
Dow Jones Sustainability World Index. Singapore in November 2018. Besides promoting 
Government, industry and NGOs to reduce 
The Youth for the Environment Day (YED) is an  corporate sustainability, the CPLC Singapore 
packaging waste. As of 2019, about 54,000 tonnes 
annual platform to engage youths to champion  has facilitated dialogue, knowledge sharing 
of packaging waste have been avoided, resulting 
environmental ownership through various activities to  and collaboration on carbon pricing between 
in estimated cost savings of about S$130 million for 
promote global and local environmental issues. The  the private and public sectors. To date, 33 
locally consumed products. Firms also contribute 
Environment Fund for Schools and the Environment  organisations have joined CPLC Singapore. 
through efforts to clean up and safeguard the 
Fund for Institutes of Higher Learning support efforts 
environment, and support other initiatives through 
by schools and youths to promote a pro-environment  CPLC Singapore has developed and launched 
sponsorship or corporate volunteers. Singapore-
mind-set in students and the community. its Carbon and Emissions Recording Tool to help 
based firms are part of this growing trend. 
businesses record, monitor and reduce their 
emissions footprint and save operational costs. It 
Another important focus area for the industry 
will also launch a Low-Carbon Mark to recognise 
sector is energy efficiency. Beyond the regulations, 
businesses for their decarbonising efforts.
incentives and capacity-building schemes as 
outlined in Chapter 4, it is important to increase 
awareness and promote thought leadership  Funan, an integrated development in Singapore 
amongst companies. The Government supports  developed by CapitaLand Group, boasts the largest area 
for urban agriculture in the city with a 1,672 m² food 
companies in improving their energy efficiency by 
garden, and a 464 m² urban farm located within it.
providing knowledge-sharing platforms such as 
the biennial National Energy Efficiency Conference 
(NEEC). NEEC offers companies opportunities to 
The YED 2019 saw more than 310 students from 38 schools  share good practices and success stories, and learn 
participating in a series of educational and interactive  from industry experts on energy management 
activities. The YED aims to encourage youths to imagine 
strategies. For example, the theme of the sixth NEEC 
and create the future environment they want to live in. 
At the Global Compact Network Singapore Summit 2018, 
in 2019 was “Enhancing energy management for 
then-Deputy Prime Minister Teo Chee Hean launched the 
sustainable growth”, and it attracted about 400 
Singapore chapter of the CPLC.
participants from various sectors.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 126 127 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 7     |     Involving the Whole Nation 
There is a growing wave of start-ups and SMEs in Singapore that focuses on 
promoting the sustainability agenda through their businesses. Such enterprises 
use market-driven strategies in innovative ways that contribute to sustainability 
efforts in Singapore and beyond. Singapore-based investment funds and business 
incubators are increasingly playing an active role in catalysing such enterprises.
ECOSOFTT takes an integrated approach to conserving and reusing water at the facility level with its Water WISE 
Buildings and Industries programmes. 
Social enterprises with a heart   this system in JTC CleanTech One reduces the 
for the environment building’s resource demand on the national 
infrastructure. 
The Singapore Centre for Social Enterprise (raiSE) 
was set up in 2015 to develop the social enterprise  Edible Garden City champions local food 
sector in Singapore. raiSE supports over 400 social  production with its urban farms to promote 
enterprise members in their social enterprise  access to fresh and safe produce in an equitable 
Circulate Capital invests in businesses such as this plastic recycling facility in Indonesia to 
journeys, from set-up to growth and expansion.  and sustainable manner. Edible Garden City 
reduce pollution from plastic waste. 
Some social enterprises under raiSE that are  also promotes sustainability education through 
related to the environment include: design-and-build consultancies for businesses 
First investment fund to reduce marine pollution and private residences. Its urban farming model, 
Eco Solutions for Tomorrow Today (ECOSOFTT)  Citizen Farm, is a community of local farmers that 
In 2019, investment management firm Circulate Capital launched its  promotes water sustainability through  grows fresh produce sold to over 40 restaurants 
Singapore-based Circulate Capital Ocean Fund, a US$106 million fund  developing solutions for water treatment and  and bars in Singapore. 
and the world’s first investment fund dedicated to preventing plastic  conservation that help estates, buildings and 
from entering Asia’s oceans. The fund will provide both debt and equity  industries reduce their water consumption and  Unpackt is a zero-waste bulk store with a smart 
financing to waste management, recycling and circular economy start-ups  waste. As an international social enterprise,  selection of food, products and daily necessities 
and small-and-medium enterprises in South and Southeast Asia.  ECOSOFTT actively channels technology,  that aims to promote waste minimisation, 
expertise and financial resources towards  reduction and recycling. The items on sale are 
water, sanitation and livelihood projects in  selected based on the store’s ethos of balancing 
rural communities around the world. In 2015,  quality and variety. Consumers are encouraged 
ECOSOFTT installed Singapore’s first treatment  to bring their own containers to eliminate 
system to recycle and reuse wastewater in a  packaging waste. 
building. By treating and reusing wastewater, 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 128 129 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 7     |     Involving the Whole Nation  Chapter 8     |     Building International Partnerships
Chapter 8
Building 
We will continue to build climate awareness through 
regular outreach programmes and campaigns, and 
International 
provide resources for all stakeholders across the private 
and people sectors – businesses, academics, households 
Partnerships
and individuals – to do their part for climate action. 
Industry associations and professional bodies such  environmental, social and governance targets by 
as the Singapore Stock Exchange, Association of  borrowing companies. Singapore’s largest banks, 
Certified Chartered Accountants, the Singapore  DBS, the Oversea-Chinese Banking Corporation 
Business Federation and the Singapore Compact are  Limited (OCBC Bank) and the United Overseas Bank 
Climate change is the ultimate challenge facing 
also taking action to encourage businesses to pursue  (UOB) have also announced moves to stop financing 
our global commons. In addition to national 
environmental stewardship as an expression of good  new coal-fired power plants. In addition, these banks 
corporate citizenship. These bodies encourage their  and other local firms such as real estate companies  efforts, Singapore works at various international 
members to adopt a triple bottom line approach in  City Developments Limited and CapitaLand Limited 
fora to strengthen the global response to climate 
their operations, by focusing not just on the financial  regularly report their activities and emissions data 
aspects of the business, but the environmental and  to the CDP (formerly the Carbon Disclosure Project),  change. We also undertake extensive capacity-
social aspects as well.  which is a United Kingdom-based organisation that 
building efforts with fellow developing countries 
administers an international system to measure, 
and long-term collaboration with key partners to 
Since 2016, SGX has required its listed companies  disclose, manage and share vital environmental data. 
to meet sustainability reporting requirements on  More details on Singapore’s green finance initiatives  support global and regional climate action.
a “comply or explain” basis. Several local banks now  are provided in Chapter 5.
offer sustainability-linked loans, which are preferential 
loan interest rates tied to the achievement of certain 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 130 131 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 8     |     Building International Partnerships
Supporting South-South   The Singapore Cooperation Programme 
and triangular cooperation
The Singapore Cooperation Programme (SCP) is 
our flagship technical assistance programme and 
Singapore is a firm supporter of South-
primary platform for South-South and triangular 
South and triangular cooperation. Having 
“South-South cooperation will be vital to ensure mutual  cooperation. Since its inception in 1992, more 
benefited from the experiences of others 
than 130,000 officials from over 170 countries 
during our early years of independence, we 
support and exchange of best practices, to enhance  have participated in SCP programmes on various 
want to pay it forward by sharing our own 
issues, including climate action, sustainable cities, 
adaptation and increase the resilience of developing  experiences and best practices in climate 
health, education and good governance. Our SCP 
action with fellow developing countries. We 
courses are closely aligned with the 17 Sustainable 
countries and communities facing the devastating impacts 
believe in the multiplier effect of investing in 
Development Goals. The SCP is also the primary 
human capital and have therefore undertaken 
of climate change. South-South cooperation can also  vehicle through which we undertake triangular 
extensive capacity-building efforts to help 
cooperation with both developed and developing 
others. We have collaborated actively through 
support the transformation of economies dependent on  countries (e.g. Australia, Chile, Japan, New Zealand, 
various bilateral, regional and multilateral 
the Republic of Korea, Thailand, and the US), as well 
fossil fuels with strategies that reinforce both sustainable  intergovernmental platforms and have worked 
as international organisations (e.g. UNFCCC, UN 
closely with other countries and international 
Development Programme (UNDP), the UN Office 
development and environmental protection.”
partners to share our experiences and best 
for Disaster Risk Reduction and the International 
practices across the globe.
Energy Agency).
UN Secretary-General António Guterres, at the Second 
High-level UN Conference on South-South Cooperation in 
Buenos Aires, Argentina, March 2019
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 132 133 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 8     |     Building International Partnerships
Partnerships under cities networks Promoting sustainable   Sharing Singapore’s approach   Partnerships under regional  
development globally on renewable energy and multilateral platforms 
Singapore is an active member in the C40 Cities 
Climate Leadership Group (C40), a network  Recognising the growing importance of  Twenty-three officials from as far as Latin America  Singapore strongly supports a multilateral, rules-
of over 90 cities working together to address  addressing climate change, we launched  participated in a week-long CAP programme  based approach to addressing climate change, and 
climate change. Our partnership with C40 has  the Climate Action Package (CAP) in 2018  on Clean Energy and Emissions Reduction that  participates actively and constructively in ongoing 
strengthened over the years. We have worked with  for a three-year period. The CAP focuses on  examined Singapore’s multi-agency approach  efforts under the UNFCCC and other UN entities, 
C40 to co-organise workshops and mayor-level  supporting the efforts of fellow developing  to formulating clean and renewable energy  to push for a credible and strong multilateral 
forums at the World Cities Summit in 2016 and 2018.  countries, in particular, fellow Member States of  solutions. Participants also interacted with  framework on climate change. Singapore is 
We have featured our green building efforts globally  ASEAN, Small Island Developing States (SIDS)  experts from Singapore’s environment, energy  privileged to have played key facilitator roles in 
by organising a technical workshop with C40 in  and Least Developed Countries (LDCs), towards  and transport agencies, as well as academics and  UNFCCC negotiations, which culminated in the 
2017. We have also been tapping on the experiences  achieving their climate pledges and building  the private sector.  adoption of the Paris Agreement at COP-21 in 2015, 
of cities such as Copenhagen and London to help  resilience. They cover topics such as climate  the agreements on the Katowice Climate Package 
inform the development of our mitigation measures  change adaptation and mitigation strategies,  at COP-24 in 2018 and the ‘Chile Madrid Time for 
in the transport sector. These engagements have  disaster risk reduction and energy efficiency  Action’ decisions at COP-25 in 2019.
allowed Singapore to capitalise on C40’s network  and emissions reduction. 
to share our climate efforts and study the best  Singapore also plays active roles in other platforms 
practices of other cities. As a member of C40, we  such as the World Trade Organization (WTO), 
have also reported our emissions and climate  World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO), 
actions to the CDP.33  the International Maritime Organization (IMO) and 
the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) 
The C40 agenda aligns with a number of Singapore’s  to help develop measures in the respective sectors 
key priorities. For instance, C40 is working on  to respond to climate change. 
how cities can leverage the ongoing global 
energy transition to decarbonise their economies 
and develop new engines of growth. This can 
help inform our work to realise our long-term  Singapore co-organised with New Zealand 
(together with the National University of Singapore 
low-emissions aspirations. Such efforts will also 
Centre for International Law) a workshop on 
complement our Smart Nation initiatives such as 
“Decoding the Paris Rulebook for Southeast  At the SG Mobility Gallery, the course participants 
the analytics of urban mobility and transportation  Asia” in October 2019 to discuss the practical  reviewed how Singapore plans, designs and builds its land 
in Singapore and smart homes solutions, which will  implementation of the Paris Agreement and  transport system to achieve energy efficiency, such as 
preparations for the Global Stocktake in 2023. through the use of smart LED street lights.
help reduce our emissions. Singapore is also part 
of the C40 Connecting Delta Cities Network and 
we will draw on the experience of other cities as 
we translate the Resilience Working Group Coastal 
Adaptation Studies into specific measures for 
implementation.
33  CDP is a not-for-profit charity that organises the global disclosure system for investors, companies, cities, states and regions to manage their environmental 
impact. Apart from the Government reporting national-level data, our companies have also reported their activities and emissions to CDP. More details are 
available in Chapter 7.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 134 135 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 8     |     Building International Partnerships
Partnering ASEAN to advance regional   Enhancing regional capacity in climate science
climate efforts
Singapore hosts the ASEAN Specialised Meteorological Centre (ASMC), which supports 
Regionally, we have taken an active role to galvanise  ASEAN Member States in the areas of weather and climate prediction, regional fire and smoke 
climate action. As Chair of ASEAN in 2018, we  haze monitoring and early warning, and capability development. In 2018, ASMC committed 
convened the first-ever Special ASEAN Ministerial  S$5 million to a five-year regional capability-building programme for Southeast Asia to help 
Meeting on Climate Action (SAMCA) and Expanded- enhance ASEAN Member States’ capabilities in weather and climate prediction. Under the 
SAMCA, where the ten ASEAN Member States,  programme, ASMC conducts a series of training workshops in enhancing climate services, 
China, Japan and the Republic of Korea reaffirmed  such as the application of climate change projections for local adaptation planning. 
their commitment to the Paris Agreement and 
discussed ways to step up regional climate action.  Singapore is also host to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) Regional Office for 
A summary of the discussions was submitted to the  Asia and the South-West Pacific, which has made enhancing regional capability in climate 
UNFCCC as input to the Talanoa Dialogue, which  science one of its priorities. ASMC is working with the WMO to implement regional initiatives 
was initiated by Fiji as the COP-23 President to take  As Chair of ASEAN in 2018, Singapore convened the first ever  by leveraging on its capability building programmes. Collectively, these efforts aim to 
stock of collective progress made in relation to the  Special ASEAN Ministerial Meeting on Climate Action (SAMCA)  strengthen regional cooperation in climate projections and adaptation planning. 
and Expanded SAMCA in 2018, where ASEAN and our Plus 
goals of the Paris Agreement. 
Three partners (China, Japan and the Republic of Korea) 
reaffirmed their commitment to the Paris Agreement and 
ASEAN countries cooperate closely on climate  discussed ways to step up regional action to address climate 
change issues at the technical-level through  change. Singapore also launched the CAP at this meeting. 
the ASEAN Working Group on Climate Change 
(AWGCC). The AWGCC aims to enhance regional 
cooperation to address the impacts of climate 
change through the implementation of projects and  To increase ASEAN’s financial resilience to climate 
activities under five thematic areas: (i) Adaptation  and disaster risk, we established the Southeast 
and Resilience, (ii) Mitigation, (iii) Technology  Asia Disaster Risk Insurance Facility (SEADRIF) 
Transfer, (iv) Climate Finance, and (v) Cross-Sectoral  in tandem with Japan and the World Bank in 
Coordination and Global Partnerships. Singapore in 2019. in tandem with Japan and the 
World Bank in Singapore in 2019. As ASEAN’s first 
Through the CAP, we have supported fellow ASEAN  regional catastrophe risk pool, SEADRIF will provide 
Member States’ implementation of their Paris  immediate liquidity to cover emergency response 
Agreement commitments. The CAP courses have  costs in the aftermath of catastrophes, with an 
helped ASEAN countries enhance their knowledge  initial focus of providing a flood risk pool for Laos, 
base and develop capacity in areas related to  Myanmar and potentially Cambodia. SEADRIF will 
climate change, such as long-term adaptation and  play a significant role in strengthening the region’s 
mitigation strategies, green finance, sustainable  economic resilience to disaster risks and mitigate the 
urban planning and green cities. adverse economic impacts of climate change. Singapore hosts the ASMC, which launched its five-year Regional Capability Building Programme for 
ASEAN at its twenty-fifth anniversary in 2018, strengthening its commitment to advance weather and 
climate services in the region
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 136 137 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 8     |     Building International Partnerships
Partnering ICAO and IMO  
to reduce international 
transport emissions
Given the transboundary nature of international  in flight efficiency will reduce aircraft fuel burn and 
aviation and maritime transport, ICAO and IMO  emissions. We are exploring innovative airspace 
have taken the lead in addressing international  concepts to advance seamless air traffic management 
transport emissions on a global basis. Singapore  across boundaries, such as Free Route Airspace and 
plays an active role at ICAO and IMO in the  Trajectory Based Operations. These concepts may 
formulation of strategies and measures to reduce  further improve flight efficiency by offering greater 
international transport emissions.  flexibility in flight planning and better predictability in 
flight operations.
Addressing international aviation emissions
Singapore carriers are taking various measures to 
On the aviation front, we support ICAO’s  improve fuel efficiency. For example, Singapore 
aspirational goals of 2% annual fuel efficiency  Airlines invests in the latest fuel-efficient aircraft 
improvement and carbon neutral growth from  models and has an average fleet age that is nearly 
2020. Singapore is ready to participate in the  half of that in the global aviation industry, reaping 
voluntary pilot phase (2021-2023) of the ICAO  significant emissions savings. Aircraft and engine 
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for  modifications to reduce drag during different stages 
International Aviation (CORSIA). The Civil Aviation  of a flight and operational measures such as data 
Authority of Singapore (CAAS) is working closely  analytics and aircraft weight management, further 
with Singapore carriers to monitor their emissions,  reduce fuel use and emissions.
and has accredited two verification bodies to 
perform CORSIA emissions verification services.  We will study the use of sustainable aviation fuels 
Singapore is also working with several States to  (SAFs). SAFs can reduce emissions by up to 80% over 
provide assistance under the ICAO Assistance,  the lifecycle compared to traditional jet fuels, but are 
Capacity-building and Training on CORSIA (ACT- two to five times more expensive today. Singapore 
CORSIA) initiative. Airlines, in partnership with CAAS, operated a 
series of 12 “green package” flights in 2017 using 
CAAS, Singapore’s Air Navigation Service Provider  sustainable biofuel, which saved 320 tonnes of carbon 
(ANSP), will continue to enhance the efficiency  emissions. The Government and industry players are  As a member of ICAO and IMO, Singapore participates in and contributes to their 
of aircraft movements within the Singapore  studying various options to find the right business and  efforts to address international transport emissions.
Flight Information Region. Through continued  technological models to enable economically viable 
investment in new technologies and close  and sustainable SAF supply chains in Singapore.
collaboration with other ANSPs, the improvements 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 138 139 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREChapter 8     |     Building International Partnerships
  Addressing international maritime emissions
  On the maritime front, Singapore is committed to  and the only viable and scalable solution for the 
environmentally sustainable international shipping  shipping industry currently. To facilitate the 
under IMO’s leadership. We actively support  greater adoption of LNG for global shipping, we 
IMO’s efforts on its Initial Strategy on Reduction of  are promoting the use of LNG as a marine fuel in 
Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Emissions from Ships and its  Singapore, growing demand for LNG and driving 
key target to reduce the total annual GHG emissions  readiness for LNG bunkering. Singapore is also 
from international shipping by at least 50% by 2050  working closely with other international port 
compared to 2008 levels. In addition to supporting  authorities and maritime administrations to build 
IMO’s work, we are implementing additional  a network of LNG bunker-ready ports. Beyond 
measures to address maritime emissions. promoting LNG, we are embarking on trials of 
electric vessels and other potential low-emissions 
  Singapore launched the Maritime Singapore Green  fuel types. 
Initiative (MSGI) in 2011 with the objective of 
reducing the environmental impact of shipping and    Singapore is encouraging R&D in new low- As climate change is a global challenge that 
shipping-related activities in the coastal and marine  carbon technologies and clean energy sources. 
environment. The Maritime and Port Authority of  To encourage the maritime industry to pursue  requires coordinated global action, Singapore 
Singapore (MPA) has pledged S$100 million under  innovation, we are collaborating with technology 
will continue to work with international 
the MSGI, which comprises four programmes:   start-ups and start-up accelerators. We are 
committed to provide an enabling environment 
stakeholders to strengthen collaborations  
i)  the Green Port Programme encourages ships  and regulatory sandboxes for the test-bedding 
to burn cleaner fuels in Singapore through a  of innovative solutions and new concepts of  and action on climate change.
reduction in port dues;  maritime operations.
ii)  the Green Ship Programme incentivises green 
ship design beyond IMO’s requirements    To position Singapore for long-term maritime 
through tax rebates;  sustainability, the Government will develop a 
iii)  the Green Energy and Technology Programme  Maritime Singapore Decarbonisation Blueprint 2050. 
promotes pilot trials and technology  The blueprint will chart out strategies to achieve 
development for maritime emissions  a sustainable Maritime Singapore. Additionally, 
reduction; and the Singapore Maritime Foundation will set up an 
iv)  the Green Awareness Programme promotes  International Advisory Panel, comprising local and 
awareness of green shipping. international industry and business leaders, to 
recommend strategies to support global maritime 
  Singapore is LNG bunkering-ready. While the  decarbonisation goals. Singapore will also set 
maritime sector is developing measures that can  aside an initial funding of S$40 million under the 
meet the IMO’s 2050 target, LNG is a cleaner  Maritime Green Future Fund to foster R&D in low-
and greener fuel than existing available options,  carbon technologies.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 140 141 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREConclusion     |     Moving to a Low-Emissions and Climate Resilient Future
Conclusion
Moving to a Low-Emissions 
and Climate Resilient Future
Climate change presents an existential challenge  within our borders to share our experiences 
for all of us – nationally, regionally and globally.  and solutions with other countries facing similar 
Singapore is committed to reduce our emissions  challenges to help advance global climate action. 
in support of achieving the long-term temperature 
goal of the Paris Agreement.  Given Singapore’s geographical constraints, 
our ability to realise a low-carbon future will be 
Ensuring a liveable environment for the present and  contingent on two key factors: the deployment 
future will require the Government, businesses and  maturity of technologies currently still in 
individuals to work closely to effect the necessary  developmental phase, e.g. carbon capture, 
transformations of our infrastructure, economy and  utilisation and storage (CCUS) and hydrogen; and 
society towards a low-carbon future.  effective international cooperation, in areas such as 
carbon storage, energy imports via regional power 
First, we will strive to achieve our long-term low- grids and other innovative platforms, and market-
emissions aspiration through the three thrusts of  based mechanisms that support environmental 
transformation, technology and collaboration, as  integrity. We aim to work with like-minded partners 
outlined in this document. We will comprehensively  to overcome these challenges over time. 
decarbonise our power sector, transform our 
industries to raise energy efficiency, and deploy  Singapore's LEDS is our commitment to global 
at a national level low-carbon solutions for  climate action. We recognise that the actions of any 
buildings, transport and waste management. We  one country, on their own, will not be enough. A 
will also adopt cross-sectoral policies to achieve  global response is needed to deliver a better and 
comprehensive climate action across multiple  more sustainable future for all of us. We will press 
sectors. Second, we will undertake significant  ahead on our long-term low-emissions aspiration 
adaptation measures to strengthen our climate  and strategies, and implement the Paris Agreement 
resilience as a vulnerable island-state. Third, we  in good faith, in the spirit of collaboration and 
will go beyond mitigation and adaptation measures  collective action with all countries.  
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 142 143 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREAnnex     |     Structure of the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Climate Change (IMCCC) Annex     |     Relevant Legislation
Annex
Relevant Legislation
Structure of the Inter-Ministerial Committee on Climate Change 
Building Control Act: https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/BCA1989 
The IMCCC oversees the Whole-of-Government coordination on climate change policies to  •  Building Control Regulations: https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/BCA1989-S666-2003
ensure that Singapore is prepared to address climate change. Established in 2007, IMCCC is 
•  Building Control (Accredited Checkers And Accredited Checking Organisations) Regulations:  
chaired by Mr Teo Chee Hean, Senior Minister and Co-ordinating Minister for National Security.
https://www.bca.gov.sg/BuildingControlAct/BUILDING_CONTROL_AC_REGULATIONS.html
•  Building Control (Buildability) Regulations:  
INTER- MINISTERIAL COMMITTEE https://www.bca.gov.sg/BuildingControlAct/others/building_control_buildability_regulations.pdf
ON CLIMATE CHANGE 
•  Building Control (Buildable Design) Regulations:  
Chaired by SM Teo Chee Hean Secretariat: 
National  https://www.bca.gov.sg/BuildingControlAct/building_control_buildable_design_regulations.html
Climate 
Change •  Building Control (Temporary Buildings) Regulations:  
Secretariat https://www.bca.gov.sg/BuildingControlAct/building_control_temp_bldg_regulations.html
IMCCC EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
Chaired by Permanent Secretary •  Building Control (Environmental Sustainability) Regulations 2008:  
(Strategy Group, PMO) 
https://www.bca.gov.sg/BuildingControlAct/others/building_control_env_sus_regulations.pdf
•  Approved Document – Acceptable Solutions:  
https://www.bca.gov.sg/BuildingControlAct/others/Approveddocument.pdf
MITIGATION NEGOTIATIONS ADAPTATION
 
Long-Term Emissions  International 
Resilience Building Maintenance and Strata Management Act:  
and Mitigation  Negotiations 
Working Group
Working Group Working Group https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/BMSMA2004 
Carbon Pricing Act 2018:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Acts-Supp/23-2018/Published/20180601?DocDate=20180601
IMCCC Executive Committee  Long-Term Emissions and Mitigation  
•  Carbon Pricing (Measurement, Reporting and Verification) Regulations 2018:  
Working Group 
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/CPA2018-S857-2018?DocDate=20181221
IMCCC is supported by an Executive Committee 
•  Carbon Pricing (Registration and General Matters) Regulations 2018:  
(Exco) comprising the permanent secretaries  LWG examines options for emission reduction 
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/CPA2018-S858-2018?DocDate=20181221
of the respective Ministries. The IMCCC  and identifies the capabilities, infrastructure and 
•  Carbon Pricing (Composition of Offences) Regulations 2018:  
Exco oversees the work of the International  policies needed for long-term mitigation.
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/CPA2018-S859-2018?DocDate=20181221
Negotiations Working Group (INWG), Long-Term 
Emissions and Mitigation Working Group (LWG)  •  Carbon Pricing Act 2018 (Commencement) Notification 2018:  
and Resilience Working Group (RWG). https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL-Supp/S856-2018/Published/20181221?DocDate=20181221
International Negotiations Working Group  Resilience Working Group  Commodity Trading Act (Cap. 48A): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/CTA1992
Development Fund Act: https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/DFA1959
INWG develops Singapore’s international climate  RWG studies Singapore’s vulnerability to the 
change negotiations strategy under the UNFCCC. effects of climate change and recommends long-
District Cooling Act: https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/84A
term plans that ensure the nation’s adaptation to 
future environmental changes.
Economic Development Board Act (Cap. 85): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/EDBA1961
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 144 145 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREAnnex     |     Relevant Legislation Annex     |     Relevant Legislation
Relevant Legislation (Continued) Relevant Legislation (Continued) 
Energy Conservation Act 2012 (Cap. 92C): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/ECA2012  •  Environmental Protection and Management (Fees for Licenses) Regulations, Reg 3: 
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-RG3 
•  Energy Conservation (Composition of Offences under Part IV) Regulations 2012:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S308-2012?DocDate=20180117 •  Environmental Protection and Management (Hazardous Substances) Regulations, Reg 4:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-RG4
•  Energy Conservation (Composition of Offences) Regulations 2013:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S247-2013?DocDate=20171222 •  Environmental Protection and Management (Trade Effluent) Regulations, Reg 5:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-RG5
•  Energy Conservation (Energy Labelling and Minimum Performance Standards for Registrable Goods) 
Regulations 2013: https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S807-2013 •  Environmental Protection and Management (Vehicular Emissions) Regulations, Reg 6:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-RG6
•  Energy Conservation (Energy Management Practices for Transport Facilities Operators) Regulations 2013:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S807-2013 •  Environmental Protection and Management (Composition of Offences) Regulations, Reg 7:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-RG7
•  Energy Conservation (Energy Management Practices) Regulations 2013:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S246-2013?DocDate=20171222&ViewType=Advance&Phrase=Energy+Con •  Environmental Protection and Management (Air Impurities) Regulations, Reg 8:  
servation+Energy+Management+Practices+Regulations+2013&WiAl=1 https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-RG8
•  Energy Conservation (Fuel Economy Labelling) Regulations 2012:   •  Environmental Protection and Management (Prohibition on the Use of Open Fires) Order 1999, Order 1:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S307-2012 https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-OR1
•  Energy Conservation (Motor Vehicles Subject to Fuel Economy Requirements) Order 2012:   •  Environmental Protection and Management (Ozone Depleting Substances) Regulations, Reg 9:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S309-2012 https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-RG9
•  Energy Conservation (Registrable Corporations) Order 2013:   •  Environmental Protection and Management (Off-Road Diesel Engine Emissions) Regulations 2012:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S248-2013 https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-S299-2012
•  Energy Conservation (Registrable Goods) Order 2013:  
Environmental Public Health Act (Cap. 95): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/EPHA1987
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/S556-2013/Revoked/20180101?DocDate=20171222
•  Environmental Public Health (Toxic Industrial Waste) Regulations, Reg 11: 
•  Energy Conservation (Transport Facility Operators) Order 2013:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPHA1987-RG11
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S806-2013
•  Environmental Public Health (General Waste Collection) Regulations, Reg 12:  
•  Energy Conservation Act 2012 (Commencement) (No. 3) Notification 2013:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPHA1987-RG12
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S805-2013?DocDate=20131227&ValidDate=20150308&TransactionDa
te=20150308
Electricity Act (Cap. 89A): http://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/EA2001 
•  Energy Conservation (Exemption for Regulated Lamps) Order 2015:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/ECA2012-S399-2015
Fisheries Act: https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/FA1966
Energy Market Authority of Singapore Act (Cap. 92B): http://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/EMASA2001
Gas Act (Cap. 116A): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/GA2001 
Environmental Protection and Management Act (Cap. 94A): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/EPMA1999  Hazardous Waste (Control of Export, Import and Transit) Act (Cap.122A):  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/HWCEITA1997 
•  Environmental Protection and Management (Boundary Noise Limits for Factory Premises) Regulations, Reg 1: 
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-RG1 •  Hazardous Waste (Control of Export, Import and Transit) Regulations, Reg 1: 
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/HWCEITA1997-RG1
•  Environmental Protection and Management (Control of Noise at Construction Sites) Regulations, Reg 2:  
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/EPMA1999-RG2
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 146 147 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREAnnex     |     Relevant Legislation Annex     |     Relevant Publications
Relevant Legislation (Continued) Relevant Publications
Housing and Development Act (Cap. 129): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/HDA1959
Jurong Town Corporation Act (Cap. 150): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/JTCA1968
Other UNFCCC Submissions34 
National Environment Agency Act (Cap. 195): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/NEAA2002 
  Singapore, as a Party to the UNFCCC, is required to submit National Communication 
National Parks Board Act (Cap. 198A): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/NPBA1996 (NC) reports and Biennial Update Reports (BUR) periodically to the UNFCCC. 
Parks and Trees Act (Cap. 216): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/PTA2005 NCs, to be submitted every 4 years, provide information on Singapore’s national 
circumstances, greenhouse gas inventory, mitigation measures, vulnerability and 
Protection of Public Sewerage System: https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/SDA1999-S338-2017?DocDate=20170629 adaptation measures, and international cooperation. BURs, to be submitted biennially, 
provide an update of the information presented in NCs, particularly on the national 
Radiation Protection Act (Cap. 262): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/RPA2007  greenhouse gas inventories and mitigation actions. 
Resource Sustainability Act 2019 (Cap. 262): https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/RSA2019 
In support of the Copenhagen Accord, Singapore submitted a pledge in 2010 to 
•  Resource Sustainability (Composition of Offences) Regulations 2019:  reduce emissions by 16% below business-as-usual (BAU) level in 2020.
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/RSA2019-S901-2019?DocDate=20191231
As required under the Paris Agreement, Singapore communicated an Intended 
•  Resource Sustainability (Exemption for Incidentally Supplied Batteries) Order 2019: 
Nationally Determined Contribution (INDC) to the UNFCCC in 2015. We subsequently 
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/RSA2019-S902-2019?DocDate=20191231
communicated an enhanced NDC to the UNFCCC in 2020. 
•  Resource Sustainability (Prescribed Regulated Products) Regulations 2019: 
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/RSA2019-S900-2019?DocDate=20191231
•  Resource Sustainability Act 2019 (Commencement) Notification 2019: 
https://sso.agc.gov.sg/SL/S899-2019?DocDate=20191231
Sewerage and Drainage Act: https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/SDA1999 
Singapore Food Agency Act 2019: https://sso.agc.gov.sg/Act/SFAA2019 
34  National Environment Agency, National Communications and Biennial Update Reports, accessed at https://www.nea.gov.sg/our-services/climate-change-
energy-efficiency/climate-change/national-communications-and-biennial-update-reports
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 148 149 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREAnnex     |     Relevant Publications Annex     |     Relevant Publications
Publication  Year Details Publication  Year Details
First NC Intended Nationally 
Determined 
Contribution (INDC)
2000 Singapore’s initial NC was submitted on 21 August 2000. Singapore’s INDC pledged to reduce our emissions intensity by 
2015 36% from 2005 levels by 2030, and to stabilise emissions with the 
aim of peaking around 2030
Copenhagen pledge
Second BUR
Singapore pledged to reduce emissions by 16% below business-as-
2010
usual (BAU) levels in 2020.
2016 Singapore's second BUR was submitted on 16 December 2016
Second NC
Fourth NC and Third 
BUR
2010 Singapore's second NC was submitted on 12 November 2010 Singapore’s fourth NC and third BUR was submitted on  
27 December 2018.
2018
(As the submission year for Singapore’s fourth NC coincided with the 
submission year of the third BUR, a combined report was submitted to 
UNFCCC.)
Third NC and First BUR
Singapore’s third NC and first BUR was submitted on 8 December 
2014.  Enhanced Nationally 
Determined 
2014
(As the submission year for Singapore’s third NC coincided with the  Contribution
submission year of the first BUR, a combined report was submitted to 
UNFCCC.)
Singapore’s enhanced NDC pledged to peak our emissions at no 
2020
higher than 65 MtCO e around 2030.
2
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 150 151 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREAnnex     |     Relevant Publications Annex     |     Relevant Publications
Publication  Year Details
Masterplans and Roadmaps 
Air-conditioning System 
Singapore has published various masterplans targeting various areas of sustainable  Efficiency Technology Primer
development and ways to mitigate and adapt to climate change. Additionally, NCCS 
and the National Research Foundation (NRF) have jointly commissioned a series of 
The Air-conditioning System Efficiency Primer 
Technology Roadmaps to accelerate research to deployment of energy and low-carbon  outlines Singapore’s policies on air-conditioning 
2011
technologies in Singapore. Many of these Roadmaps were informed by the Technology  efficiency, the available technology, and 
Primers developed earlier in 2011, as referenced below. opportunities to improve energy efficiency. 
Publication  Year Details Biorenewables Technology 
Primer
Singapore Green Plan
The Biorenewables Primer sets out the 
biorenewable conversion technologies used 
2011 in Singapore at the time and elsewhere, the 
1992  The Singapore Green Plan highlights our 
application of biofuels for transport, and the areas 
(Updated  commitment and plans to ensure Singapore’s 
of R&D for Singapore.
in 2012) environmental sustainability.
Carbon Capture and Storage/
Sustainable Singapore Blueprint Utilisation Technology Primer
The CCS/U Primer describes the potential 
2011 application of CCS/U technologies in Singapore 
and the process involved in their deployment. 
2009
The Sustainable Singapore Blueprint outlines 
Singapore’s vision and plans for a more liveable 
(Updated 
and sustainable Singapore to support the diverse 
in 2015 
needs and growing aspirations of Singaporeans 
and
through various initiatives. 
2016)
Energy Storage 
Technology Primer
The Energy Storage Primer sets of the means of 
energy storage, stages of commercial maturity, 
2011
its potential applications in Singapore including 
electric vehicles and smart grids.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 152 153 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREAnnex     |     Relevant Publications Annex     |     Relevant Publications
Publication  Year Details Publication  Year Details
Smart Grid Technology Primer Second National Climate Change 
Study – Climate Projections to 
2100 Science Report
The Smart Grid Technology Primer proposes the 
2011 key drivers for smart grid implementation, current  The Second National Climate Change Study for 
projects, and areas for R&D in Singapore.
2014 Singapore provides information on anticipated 
climate change. 
Solar Energy Technology Primer
Carbon Capture and Storage / 
The Solar Energy Technology Primer describes 
Utilisation Roadmap
the potential of solar electricity generation in  The Carbon Capture and Storage/Utilisation 
2011
Singapore, potential storage possibilities, and  (CCS/U) Roadmap identifies and studies various 
areas for R&D in this domain. options of CCS/U relevant for Singapore, the 
2014 potential of CCS/U technologies for carbon 
abatement and the R&D strategies that would 
accelerate the deployment of CCS/U in Singapore 
Green Data Centre Technology  in the longer term. 
Prime
The Green Data Centre Technology Primer reviews  Solar Photovoltaic Roadmap
existing and emerging technologies for improving 
2011
data centre efficiency and areas for R&D for  The Solar Photovoltaic Roadmap presents 
Singapore. the development of photovoltaic scenarios 
2014 for Singapore and pathways to increase the 
contribution of solar energy to Singapore’s 
energy mix.
National Climate Change 
The National Climate Change Strategy 2012 
Strategy
outlines Singapore's plans to address climate 
Green Data Centre Roadmap
change through a whole-of-nation approach. 
The key elements of Singapore's climate strategy  The Green Data Centre Technology Roadmap 
2012 include reducing emissions across sectors,  sets out a framework to improve data centre 
building capabilities to adapt to the impact  sustainability. The Roadmap aims to reduce 
2014
of climate change, harnessing green growth  energy consumption and improve the energy 
opportunities as well as forging partnerships on  efficiency of data centre facilities and information 
climate change action. technology.
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 154 155 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREAnnex     |     Relevant Publications Annex     |     Relevant Publications
Publication  Year Details Publication  Year Details
Building Energy Efficiency  Waste Management Roadmap
Roadmap The Waste Management Roadmap reviews 
developing and emerging trends in waste 
The Building Energy Efficiency Roadmap outlines  management technologies worldwide addressing 
R&D pathways to improve energy efficiency within  2016 waste processes from collection and sorting, to 
2014
the building stock via technology improvements  upcycling and treatment. The Roadmap proposes 
and policy recommendations.  a set of technological pathways to address the 
identified implications. 
E-Mobility Roadmap
The latest publication of Singapore’s Climate 
Climate Action Plan: Take Action 
Action Plan: Take Action Today, for a Sustainable 
Today, for a Sustainable Future The E-Mobility Roadmap serves as a blueprint 
Future comprises two complementary 
to guide the formulation of policies and 
publications on Singapore’s mitigation and  2016
infrastructure plans that could enable successful 
adaptation plans. The first publication sets out 
electromobility deployment in Singapore.
2016 how Singapore intends to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions and increase our energy 
efficiency to meet our 2030 climate pledge. 
The second explains how Singapore may be 
Public Sector Sustainability Plan 
affected by climate change and our strategy  
2017 - 2020
to prepare for them.
The Public Sector Sustainability Plan 2017-
Our Water, Our Future
2020 charts the Singapore Government’s path 
This publication sets out Singapore’s water 
2017 towards achieving environmental sustainability, 
strategies and plans that will be undertaken in the 
2016 as part of our nationwide Sustainable Singapore 
next 50 years. It shares how Singapore plans to 
Movement.
expand our capacities on water supply, used water 
(Updated 
management and drainage against the challenges 
in 2017)
of urbanisation, climate change and the rising cost 
of energy. 
Zero Waste Masterplan
The Zero Waste Masterplan sets a new waste 
Industry Energy Efficiency 
reduction target for Singapore – to reduce the 
Roadmap
The Industry Energy Efficiency Roadmap identifies  waste sent to Semakau Landfill each day by 
2019
and describes the technological potential  30% by 2030. This will help to extend Semakau 
and opportunities to reduce energy use from  Landfill’s lifespan beyond 2035, when it is 
2016 business-as-usual levels up to 2030. The Roadmap  estimated to reach capacity. 
addresses the petrochemical and chemicals 
sector, petroleum refining, semiconductors, 
pharmaceuticals, and cross-sectoral technologies. 
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 156 157 CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTUREAnnex     |     Acknowledgements
Acknowledgements
Prepared in collaboration with:  Images contributed by: 
 
Ministry of Education Aquaculture Centre of Excellence Pte Ltd
Ministry of Finance Barramundi Asia
Ministry of Foreign Affairs  Building and Construction Authority
Ministry of Manpower CapitaLand
Ministry of National Development Changi Airport Group
Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources  Circulate Capital
Ministry of Trade and Industry  ECOSOFTT
Ministry of Transport Energy and Environmental Sustainability Solutions for Megacities
Building and Construction Authority Energy Market Authority
Civil Aviation Authority of Singapore Global Compact Network Singapore
Economic Development Board  Housing & Development Board
Energy Market Authority Innosparks
Housing & Development Board JTC Corporation
Land Transport Authority Land Transport Authority
Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore Meteorological Service Singapore
Monetary Authority of Singapore Ministry of Foreign Affairs 
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore Ministry of National Development
National Environment Agency Ministry of the Environment and Water Resources 
National Parks Board Ministry of Transport
National Research Foundation Monetary Authority of Singapore
National University of Singapore Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
PUB, Singapore’s National Water Agency National Climate Change Secretariat
Singapore Food Agency National Environment Agency
SkillsFuture Singapore National Parks Board
Workforce Singapore National University of Singapore
PUB, Singapore’s National Water Agency
Sembcorp Industries
Solar Energy Research Institute of Singapore 
SP Group
Sunseap Group
Sustenir Agriculture Singapore
Workforce Singapore
CHARTING SINGAPORE'S LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE 158