 
 
The UK is pleased to submit our 2017 Clean Growth Strategy1 as the UK’s current long-term 
strategy, to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), in 
accordance with Article 4, paragraph 19 of the Paris Agreement that invites Parties “to formulate 
and communicate long-term low greenhouse gas emission development strategies”. The UK 
welcomes this opportunity to join other leading Parties and demonstrate our resolve to the aims, 
objectives, obligations and ideals of the Paris Agreement. By submitting our current long-term 
strategy, we are cementing our commitment and ambition to work with the rest of the world to 
hold the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C and to pursue efforts to 
limit the temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels.  
This year marks the tenth anniversary of the UK’s ground-breaking Climate Change Act. The 
Act committed the UK to reducing greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80% by 2050 
compared to 1990 levels through a process of legally binding five-year caps on emissions, 
Carbon Budgets, and then to report the policies and progress to meet them. The UK has 
reduced emissions by 41% since 1990 whilst our economy has grown by two-thirds.2 As we 
mark this anniversary year of the Act we have already outperformed our first carbon budget, and 
we are on track to overachieve on our second and third carbon budgets running from 2013 to 
2022, whilst expecting to grow our economy by 12%. We have made progress across every 
sector of our economy, and further low-carbon growth, an estimated 11% per year between 
2015 and 2030, could deliver between £60 billion and £170 billion of export sales by 2030.  
The UK was the first country to set legally binding emission reduction targets and elements of 
the Act have been replicated around the world, with countries including France, Denmark, 
Mexico and Sweden now having similar legislation in place. Since the introduction of the Act, 
the UK’s experience has shown the benefits of keeping a long-term perspective in the policy 
making process. This is why we have shared our knowledge and practical experience with other 
countries to help them create governance frameworks and long-term strategies, including 
through our membership of the 2050 Pathways Platform.   
We have also supported others in their long-term planning by sharing the 2050 Calculator 
energy and emissions model, an open-source and easy-to-use tool that was used by the UK to 
develop the 2011 Carbon Plan. The tool has now been adapted by over 30 countries, including 
ten developing countries that received climate finance from the UK to support the development 
of their own Calculator models. 
Whilst this is the first long-term low emission development strategy we have submitted to the 
UNFCCC, it is the third such strategy that the UK has produced. In 2009 we published the “UK 
Low Carbon Transition Plan” covering the first three carbon budget periods from 2008 to 2022, 
and in 2011 “The Carbon Plan” covering the fourth carbon budget period. Both of these 
                                                             
1 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/651916/BEIS_The_Clean_
Growth_online_12.10.17.pdf 
2 https://www.gov.uk/government/statistics/final-uk-greenhouse-gas-emissions-national-statistics-1990-2016  
publications, like the Clean Growth Strategy, took a 2050 perspective. Likewise, in the future, 
our strategy will evolve as innovation and technology develops.  
The UK’s Clean Growth Strategy outlines in detail our action up to 2032, in line with our Carbon 
Budgets, and highlights possible pathways to our 2050 target. Despite our significant 
achievements to date, we recognise that hitting our carbon budgets and growing our low carbon 
economy brings its own challenges, that can be achieved through ambition, innovation and 
efforts to scale up investment. To ensure we continue to build economic growth while cutting 
emissions, clean growth has a central role within the UK’s Industrial Strategy. We will need to 
mobilise more private capital in sustainable projects, with the UK acting as a hub for global low 
carbon investment.  
Some of the major policies that will deliver both on the carbon budgets up to 2032 and beyond 
to 2050 include:   
•  accelerating the shift to low carbon transport, committing to the end-of-sale of new 
conventional petrol and diesel cars and vans by 2040;  
•  phasing out the use of unabated coal to produce electricity by 2025;  
•  supporting British businesses to improve their energy productivity by at least 20% by 
2030; and 
•  working towards our ambition of zero avoidable waste by 2050. 
The Clean Growth Strategy sets out the range of opportunities for the UK out to 2050 and gives 
an overview of three illustrative 2050 pathways:  
1.  The Electricity pathway - where transport and heating are primarily fuelled by electricity, 
virtually all of which is from clean sources. 
2.  The Hydrogen pathway - using hydrogen to heat our homes and buildings, to fuel 
vehicles, and to power UK’s industry; and finally.  
3.  The Emissions removal pathway - where biomass power stations are used in parallel with 
carbon capture, utilisation and storage (CCUS).  
These pathways help us to identify low-regrets steps we can take in the next few years common 
to many low-carbon visions of the future. The importance of far-reaching strategies is vital to the 
success of achieving our goals.  
It is only through innovation that we will see the cost of clean technologies come down. Our 
strategy sets out how £2.5bn will be invested by the UK Government to support low-carbon 
innovation between 2015-2021. These technologies will be needed through the 2030s and 
2040s, as well as for the immediate challenges of decarbonisation.  
In the Clean Growth Strategy we announced Green Great Britain Week, a high-profile annual 
week starting in Autumn 2018. The week will bring together government, business, academia, 
civil society and communities to celebrate clean growth and look at climate change in the UK in 
a new light. The Clean Growth Strategy, and the Clean Growth Grand Challenge under the 
Industrial Strategy, recognise that building on the successful decarbonisation of the power 
sector requires looking further across the whole of the economy and the country. The choices 
that people, communities and businesses make around areas like transport and heating will be  
increasingly important to action on climate change. Green Great Britain Week will bring together 
groups to forge a greater sense of responsibility around these challenges in an inclusive 
manner.  
Later this year the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will set out its “Special 
Report on Global Warming of 1.5°C” and the world will come together in Katowice at COP24 to 
consider our collective progress in mitigating climate change through the Talanoa Dialogue. We 
know that currently the world is not on track to meet the targets of Paris. Our collective 
commitment in Paris is well documented but it is not enough. 
The Paris Agreement includes an aim to achieve rapid reduction of emissions by sources and 
removal by sinks of greenhouse gases in the second half of the century. More needs to be 
understood about the global path to net zero emissions and to help meet this, the UK will need 
to legislate for a net zero emissions target at an appropriate point in the future to provide legal 
certainty on where the UK is heading.  
We ask that by 2020 all Parties come forward with their own long-term low emission 
development strategies. We believe that setting out a long-term strategy is one of the important 
steps that each member of the global community should take to ensure we reach the Paris 
goals. We hope the UK can be an inspirational example of what is possible, and most of all we 
look forward to working with other countries to develop and implement their own long-term 
strategies, so we can continue to learn from each other and collaborate in the true spirit of the 
Paris Agreement. 
 
 
 
THE RT HON CLAIRE PERRY MP 
Minister of State 