CHILE LONG TERM ROAD TO CARBON NEUTRALITY AND RESILIENCE NO LATER THAN 2050 The Council of Ministers for Sustainability at its session on October 21, 2021 pronounce favorably on the contents of this Long-Term Climate Strategy. Which was approved by the President of the Republic and subsequently presented during COP26 to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Path to carbon neutrality and resilience by 2050 Climate change is the biggest challenge we face as humanity. face it willingly generation. Science has spoken to us loud and clear and has shown us again is to exponentially increase our efforts to reduce our emissions. sions multisectoral training that opens the way to sustainable development emission neutral and climate resilient we must change course This is how we have understood it in Chile in a binding manner in our Climate Change Framework Law Project recently approved by It is in the Second Constitutional Procedure. Even in the difficult context in which we find ourselves as a result of the pandemic of COVID19 meet your commitments introduce to the UNFCCC Establishing that our carbon budget for the period 2020 – 2030 will be 1.1 billion tons of CO 2eq of emissions at the national level and sions will occur no later than the year 2025 the carbon neutrality. Today we are fulfilling a new and great commitment required by the Agreement from Paris lays out the roadmap that we must follow over the coming decades to achieve carbon neutrality and climate resilience. Science has shown us that not only the destination port the way to achieve the goals is important. It is not enough to set ambitious goals ciosas. It is also necessary to define how we are going to comply. For this, the ECLP defines sectoral limits of CO emissions from the emission limit established 2eq ed in our NDC and establishes more than 400 transition goals to all sectors of society in an integrated manner in climate action at regional and community levels according to planning and regional development strategies that it establishes for each territory. Goals are based on science and ambitious to achieve carbon neutrality and climate resilience. It is about Road to carbon neutrality and resilience to 2050 Road to carbon neutrality and resilience to 2050 of a new unprecedented commitment in Chile. It is the first time in our country I appreciate your collaboration we establish sectoral limits on carbon emissions by 2030 mandatory and binding with the approval of the Draft Framework Law on Change commitments and achieve comprehensive development Climate no later than 2050. Each generation faces its own challenges and missions. The challenge of our In order to implement the actions and measures the different sectors must- generation is to face and overcome the climate crisis with will They will develop mitigation and adaptation plans based on the 5 fundamentals The mission of our generation is to ensure the survival of humanity construction of the ECLP. First of all relative Science has spoken loud and clear common goal. In second place environmental. Citizenship requires us czar the implementation of actions and measures. In third place vocado course in which we find ourselves Based on Nature now. Technology gives us the tools to be able to successfully face both mitigation and adaptation. In fourth place climate challenges. of the NDC permanently in compliance with the Sustainable Development Goals only selfishness tenible (ODS) bonus neutrality and save our survival on planet Earth. decision making. The time for words and doubts is over. It's time for action In order to implement this path, a coordinated effort is required. and the will. comprehensive and transversal despite the difficulties of the pandemic of more than 4,000 people in more than 100 workshops throughout Chile presence in all regions and more than 700 formal observations. This participa- for our children training allowed us to strongly strengthen the ECLP with measures that we allowed while we were still in time to protect and save human life in the ensure compliance with the goals set. A) Yes and participation of all citizens was a key element for the preparation of the ECLP. Sebastian Pinera E. What's more President of Chile the Scientific Committee through its Report on Na-based Solutions nature and Preliminary Report of the ECLP Proposal for climate action cipation of the Ministers of Finance civil society volunteers and communities TABLE OF CONTENTS 01 03 1.1 Paris Agreement and Long-Term Strategies 14 Mitigation: Path to Carbon Neutrality no later than 2050 56 1.2 Draft Climate Change Framework Law 14 3.1 Context of emissions budgets or cumulative emissions target 57 1.3 Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) and Sustainable Development Goals 15 3.2 Allocation of emission budgets and mitigation efforts at the sector level 59 1.4 Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and trends in Chile 16 3.3 Implementation of sectoral budget allocation 76 1.5 Chile 1.6 Humanity at a crossroads and the role of civil society 26 3.5 Black Carbon Component 81 1.7 Participatory elaboration of the ECLP 28 02 04 Chile's long-term vision: Transition to sustainable and inclusive development by 2050 at the latest 34 Adaptation: Path to climate resilience 88 2.1 Chile 2.2 Chile 2.3 Fundamentals of construction of the ECLP 38 4.3 Indicators for Monitoring INDEX 06 A territorial and intersectoral issue 179 05 6.1 National coordination 6.2 Capacity building for regional and community management of climate change 186 6.3 Articulation of financing mechanisms for regional and local climate action 187 Sectoral contributions and integration components 106 6.4 Goals to implement climate change management at the regional and local levels 188 5.1 Energy 108 07 5.2 Mining 113 5.3 Silvoagropecuario  118 5.4 Fisheries and aquaculture 125 5.5 Waste and circular economy 130 Cost effectiveness (economic 5.6 Building and cities 133 7.1 Indirect Costs of Inaction on climate change 194 5.7 Infrastructure 140 7.2 Cost Effectiveness of Carbon Neutrality 200 5.8 Transport 145 08 5.9 Health 153 5.10 Tourism 156 5.11 Coastal Border 160 5.12 Biodiversity 164 Means of implementation and monitoring of the ECLP 205 5.13 Water resources 170 8.1 Means of implementation 206 5.14 Ocean 176 8.2 Monitoring 01 background 02 CHILE'S LONG-TERM VISION 03 MITIGATION Photography by Bryan Contreras14 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 15 of governance 1.1 Paris Agreement and adequate pation greenhouse gas emissions Long-Term Strategies resilience and guarantee compliance with international commitments assumed by the State of Chile to face the challenges imposed by climate change. This bill passed the Senate floor at large. Chile has faced climate change as a State Policy taking a proactive position in the international agenda and negotiations for the second constitutional proceeding before the National Congress. the bill climate change public policy and also in the ambition of the commitments that the country stands out for its transversality has acquired. One of the climate change management instruments established in the That is why Chile presents its Lar Climate Strategy at COP26 - Draft Framework Law on Climate Change Go Term (ECLP) in order to consolidate the vision of the State to face Long Term matics climate change and comply with the provisions of Article 4(19) of the Long-term Agreement that the country will follow in a transversal and integrated manner do of Paris that indicates that the parties should formulate their ECLP taking into account how Chile will achieve compliance with the object of this bill taking into account the temperature objective established in said agreement and "taking the Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) as the intermediate goal in consideration of their common but differentiated responsibilities and their ca- on this path. The Long-Term Climate Strategy respective capacities Although the Paris Agreement does not define in detail the format or content of the ECLPs delivered strategies to date2 |) 1.3 Contribution Determined to Experts have established some fundamental principles and best practices. From this experience and considering the national reality has established in its Climate Change Framework Law Project the main National Level (NDC) and Objectives the contents of the ECLP will allow defining how the goal of GHG neutrality will be achieved and increase Sustainable Development of resilience no later than 2050. 4 | Ministry of the Interior and Security 1.2 Draft Framework Law On April 9, 2020 having its commitment to face climate change Exteriors; Ministry of Defence Updating your Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) Climate Change which was built through a process that involved actors from the sector Ministry of Economy public subnational. tion Ministry of Health; Ministry of The new NDC incorporates various goals for the year 2030 in terms of mitigation. Housing and Urbanism; Ministry of Considering the importance that the problem of GHG change and short-lived climate pollutants (hereinafter forcing Farming; Ministry of Mining; climate change at the national level and the vulnerability of the country to its impacts Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications ministry of the environment ammunition; Ministry of energy; Legal Division Ministry of Environment; large Ministry of Science 1 | https://unfccc.int/files/meetings/ on Climate Change3 | Knowledge and Innovation; Minis- paris_nov_2015/application/pdf/pa- in society. and resilience no later than 2050 has already defined the country based on science. theory of Social Development and Family; ris_agreement_spanish_.pdf The Climate Change Framework Law Project 2 | https://unfccc.int/process/the-pa- cia ris-agreement/long-term-strategies achieving and maintaining carbon neutrality and moving towards resilience to change priority maximizing synergies between climate commitments with the 5 | NDC_Chile_2020_english-1.pdf 3 | Senate - Processing of climate projects no later than 2050. Along with this, it establishes principles tenible (ODS) a balanced and integrated development in the economic dimensions and environmental. GHG emissions and removals The LULUCF sector in carbon dioxide equivalent Through the COP25 Presidency International defender of the Paris Agreement as a basis for decision-making and calling on all parties to deliver -63,992 kt CO due mainly to the increase in forest biomass 2eq Ambitious NDCs and ECLPs before COP26. and wood products. A maximum of emissions of the sector stands out 8 | The term "GHG emissions in 2017 when 570,000 ha were affected by fires in forest lands-total» refers only to the sum such expressed in carbon dioxide With this, the balance between GHG emissions and removals in Chile (that is, 1.4 Equivalent gas emissions (CO). That term including LULUCF) reached 48,321 kt CO . The main causes 2eq 2 eq excludes emission sources and of this trend are the burning of fossil fuels and Forest Lands. sector absorption sinks greenhouse effect (GHG) them. The values that escape the trend in the balance (Table 1 and Figure 1) UTCUTS. are consequence in the LULUCF sector. and trend in Chile 6 | Table 1 INGEI of Chile: balance and total emissions of GEI (kt CO) per sector 2eq Since 2012, Chile has had the National Inventory System of GHG emissions (SNI) led by the Ministry of the Environment. Sector 1990 2000 2010 2013 2016 2017 2018 The GHG Emissions Inventory (INGEI) of Chile is updated every 2 years 6 | The sectors referred to in this as established by the rules of the Framework Convention of the United Nations 1. Energy 33,631 section correspond to those defined for Climate Change (UNFCCC) and is reported in the Biennial Reports in the National Updating Inventory Report (future Biennial Transparency Reports). Chile is a nal of Greenhouse Gases queño emitter (INGEI) de Chile The definitions are also in commitments to mitigate emissions as has been demonstrated and use of pro- line with the IPCC Guidelines with the goal of carbon neutrality and the update of the NDC with a pipeline goal (IPPU) 2006 for the elaboration of INGEI. ambitious to the year 2030 and based on science. The Energy sector includes all 3. Agriculture 11,834 emissions from burning fuel The last update of the INGEI was presented in 2020 to the Con- fossil fuels and fugitive emissions United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and contains 4. LULUCF -60,152 related to processing the GHG Emissions Inventory for the period between the years and distribution thereof; the 1990 to 2018. It is worth mentioning that the inventory is prepared following Directive Industrial processes sector and use of 5. Waste 1,519 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories products (IPPU) that considers the greenhouse emissions due to transformations Balance 7 | - 10,943 carbon dioxide (CO) sorptions and methane (CH) emissions physicochemical during production 2 4 nitroso (N O) and the use of products; sector 2 Total 8 | 49,209 sulfur ion (SF ). In particular for the year 2018 Agriculture including emissions 6 total greenhouse gases in the country (excluding the Land use sector by enteric fermentation land-use change and forestry (LULUCF)) were 112,313 kt CO manure and fertilizer use; the 2eq increasing by 128% since 1990 and by 2% since 2016. The main LULUCF sector corresponds to all Source: Chile's 4th Biennial Update Report on Climate Change. GHG (Greenhouse Gas) emitted was CO (78%) emissions related to the use of 2 4 NO (6%) the earth and its changes; and sector 2 Waste includes emissions from the methanogenesis processes of the energy sector (consumption of fossil fuel for energy purposes) the organic components of the is the main GHG emitter, representing 77% of total emissions solid and liquid waste. in 2018 Figure 1: INGEI of Chile: balance of GEI (kt CO) by sector 2eq 1990-2018 series. from Manufacturing and construction industries and 9% from Other sectors. 1% intentional or unintentional remaining corresponds to the category Fugitive fuel emissions10 |. emissions of GHG released during the removal The Industrial Processes and Product Use (IPPU) sector, storage and distribution of in English) by 197% since 1990 and by 11% since 2016. This is explained due to the princi- mainly due to the increased use of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) in refrigeration. generation of the cement industries of GHG from the IPPU sector correspond to the category Use of substitute products of substances that deplete the ozone layer trio of minerals Non-energy products from fuels and use of solvents and 1% of Ma- manufacture and use of other products. The Agriculture sector represented 11% of total GHG emissions in 2018 due mainly to the decline in the population of cattle and sheep that has recorded over the last decade. Regarding the categories Source: Chile's 4th Biennial Update Report on Climate Change. GHG emissions correspond to Enteric Fermentation of Agricultural Soils and 13% for Manure Management. The minority categories ries correspond to 3 It is worth mentioning that 0 vention and the 2006 IPCC Guidelines in the countryside. by the consumption of fossil fuels for international air transport and maritime of GHG emissions and removals in the country in order to be able to compare in 2018 stable inventories in all countries. due to the increase in population and its generated waste and the increase of industrial waste. 67% of its emissions correspond to the category 1.4.1 GHG emissions and trend residuals with 30%. then a 1 and open burning of waste and biological treatment of solid waste respectively. The energy sector national 2 increased its emissions by 2018 by 159% since 1990 and by 1% since 2016 respectively. These data correspond to the behavior of consumption As of 2018, its sink condition increased by 6% since 1990 and decreased energy of the country general consumption of liquid fossil fuel (mostly diesel and gasoline) for mourning between emissions and absorptions of the sector with 83% and 10% respectively. ground transportation. tively. 4 follow of Settlements Since 2016 there has been a stabilization in emissions from this sector to wetlands. Forest fires have a significant effect on the 9 | For greater detail of the natural gas plant entrances emissions and the methodology for approximately 25% of electricity generation. Adds in addition to altering trends the estimate the Report of the National Inventory pation of wind and solar energy of greenhouse gases 2016 reaching 31,685 TJ by 2018 From Chile online: https://unfccc.int/sites/ This decline is offset by growth in consumption of benefits. default/files/resource/7305681_Chicinas and diesel in land transport. The main subcategories of the sec- le-BUR4-1-2020_IIN_CL.pdf tor energy are: Energy industries (mainly electricity generation) 20 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 21 Figure 2 Change in Annual Mean Temperature 1.5 Chile in Drought Frequency Snowpacks and Change in Snowpack (2035-2065) against climate change Chile is considered a highly vulnerable country to climate change according to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change Climate (UNFCCC defined by this body: low coastal areas; arid and semi-arid zones areas with forest cover and areas exposed to forest deterioration; zones prone to socio-natural disasters; areas exposed to drought and desertification; areas of high urban air pollution and areas of fragile ecosystems The impacts derived from climate change affect the natural habitat and society throughout the territory fundamental to national life. For this reason, the country has been developing tools to assess and monitor climate threats partners and the vulnerability of the various territories and sectors highlights the Adaptation Platform “Atlas of Climate Risks (ARClim)” with information for the entire country at the community level launched in November 2020. This platform contains climate projections tics presented through the Climate Hazards Explorer and Maps Climate Risk adaptation measures that make it possible to face the climatic risks that affect to the national territory. According to the Climate Threat Explorer continuation of the upward trend in temperatures in the period 2035- 2065 1980-2010. This rise is also reflected in an increase in temperatures extreme its effects on the height of the 0°C isotherm ARClim projections for snow accumulation between the historical average and the medium future: it is expected that the snow accumulated in the Cordillera de los Andes could decrease by 100% in areas of the foothills and fjords. two from the south end. As for the precipitation It remains dry for 14 consecutive years. accumulated rainfall in the central zone of Chile will decrease by an average of 15% in the medium future compared to historical values. Additionally, it is projected that the frequency of droughts increases by 10% -23% between the regions of Coquimbo and Los Lagos in the mid-future.22 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 23 Figure 3: Relative climatic risks Thermal comfort Frost and Heat Wave Effect on Human Health (future) Source: ARClim Climate Risk Atlas Platform. More information available Available at: https://arclim.mma.gob.cl/atlas/sector_index/salud_humano/ Source: ARClim Climate Risk Atlas Platform. More in- Regarding the risks for Biodiversity training at: https://arclim.mma.gob.cl/amenazas/ and fauna due to changes in rainfall and temperatures the specific impact on the geographic distribution of certain species lizing your spatial movement into the future current and projection of climatic variables. The results indicate Regarding the Climate Risk Maps at the community level that the highest risk is concentrated between the Ñuble Region and the so the impacts and risks projected for the entire national territory to from the rivers. The south central zone of continental Chile is identified as the zone Human settlements at increased risk relative to climate change coastal a lower capacity of the species of flora and fauna to persist in the zones farming nas of its current distribution. A) Yes of the main results length of the country11 | to expedite the preservation of ecosystems and to avoid greater pres- Regarding the systems that concentrate more communes with risk levels tropics on them. tall versity The analysis of climate risks for cities and human settlements hands obtained through ARClim allows understanding the effects of change 11 | ARClim considers 345 will incorporate the commune of the Antar- of threats and the heterogeneity of the effect on the risk in the different tica that is pending. geographical areas of Chile. 24 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 25 Figure 4: Relative climate risks for Fauna and Flora due to changes in precipitation- Figure 5: Relative risks in crop productivity tions and temperature (change) annual (change) Source: ARClim Climate Risk Atlas Platform. More information available Available at: https://arclim.mma.gob.cl/atlas/sector_index/biodiversidad/ Source: ARClim Climate Risk Atlas Platform. More information Available at: https://arclim.mma.gob.cl/atlas/sector_index/agricultura/ for the country's agriculture annual yields representative of the national production system (Wheat inside and animal carrying capacity precipitation obtained vary from one subsystem to another. For annual crops, it is considered critical to mitigate the effects of floods. Between the Maule and Biobío region Everyone will be at risk. Usually the greatest relative risk is seen in coastal areas and in the center-north of the country while Andean tor of the southern zone. With regard to meadows and carrying capacity or no infrastructure capable of carrying water to the receiving channels- animal in the studied areas. Finally it is estimated that the trend positions the coastal zone and the intermediate depression with projections of increase in both frequency and severity. between the regions of Coquimbo and Biobío as the areas of greatest risk related to climate change. 26 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 27 Figure 6: Relative risks of hydrological droughts (change) In this sense, both the scientific community and local communities urban floods (future) and river overflows (future) they pose resilience-focused training data of the people. These urgent transitions have as a condition necessary a great alliance that commits the whole of society and all you sound individually. Conviction at international and national level importance of involving the entire society in climate action to achieve Overcome the crisis of the United Nations on Climate Change (UNFCCC) through the article 6 on education with the Doha Work Program (2012-2020) reaffirming the need to promote changes in lifestyles and sustainable consumption and behavior to foster sustainable development adapting to the impacts of climate change and strengthening capacities institutional and sectoral. in addition Sustainable Development 4. Quality Education to all women and girls Sustainable cities and communities and solid institutions and 17. Alliances to achieve the objectives. From the Paris Agreement (2015) onwards, efforts have been made to accelerate action Source: Climate Risk Atlas Platform ARClim tuation of governments concrete steps to limit the temperature rise to no more than 1 to 2100. In this sense The Parties shall cooperate in the adoption of the corresponding measures. give to improve education 1.6 Humanity in one of the public and public access to information on climate change Bearing in mind the importance of these measures to improve the action crossroads and role under this Agreement. At the SDG Summit in September 2019 of civil society, advances up to that moment have been insufficient and a: call for all sectors of society to mobilize in favor of of a decade of action on three levels: global action to ensure develop greater leadership Humanity has started the year 2021 plunged into a multidimensional crisis with respect to the Sustainable Development Goals; action at the local level that includes nal and global that puts at risk the sustainability of ecosystems that po- necessary transitions in policies make life sibilant sectors of the population. The COVID19 pandemic has aggravated local problems; and action by people social and economic and is installed as a new wake-up call on civil the urgent transformation to a sustainable and inclusive development. academics and other stakeholders that promotes the necessary transformations. Of the problems facing humanity most relevant challenge and people. This global phenomenon affects all communities and ecosystems, therefore but and immediate attention. The changes to be made compromise and affect lifestyles sustainable consumption and production patterns way in which peoples and societies conceive life in common and for The following diagram presents the 3 main stages that constituted can give the participatory process of the ECLP and the transversal instances that accompany of the magnitude and importance of the task They covered the whole process; and each of these is described below. effort to be made has been called Action for Climate Empowerment (ACE Figure 7: Participatory elaboration process of the ECLP At the national level since the first National Climate Change Action Plan tico (PANCC) 2008 -2012 an axis of creation and promotion of capacities was integrated which included lines of action for institutional strengthening awareness and international cooperation fica among other aspects. This axis has been reinforced over the years and consolidates with the Climate Change Framework Law Project that establishes that the ECLP must give the guidelines and objectives for the development of capacities and the climate action (see Chapter 8.1. Means of implementation) also the obligation to develop transparent citizen participation for all climate management instruments developed by the Ministry of the Environment and by the corresponding sectoral Ministries. 1.7 Participatory elaboration of the ECLP The design and construction process of the ECLP contemplated a process of participa- multiactoral tion participatory different coordination instances from the public sector Indigenous villages around the construction of a vision of Chile to «Move towards a sustainable development low in greenhouse gas emissions treason; reduce vulnerability and increase resilience to adverse effects of climate change by 2050 at the latest. The multiplicity of instances participate- Source: Own elaboration. tives carried out to prepare the ECLP 1) Early participation: It consisted of a process of multi- tiactoral to develop the ECLP proposal Principles of citizen participation in climate change management online participatory sessions 52% were women and 48% men. This process made it possible to identify visions • Encourage the participation of any person or group of people in the preparation at the sectoral and intersectoral level; analyze the robustness of the ECLP lization of climate change management instruments. evaluating measures towards carbon neutrality and the method- • Facilitate instances of citizen participation dology for the definition of water security indicators for the adaptation consideration with vulnerable sectors and communities tation; and identify opportunities and challenges to incorporate and relate • Facilitate timely and adequate access to information on climate change. and awareness on the matter and reducing information asymmetries. and communal) with the national. • Articulate adequate coordination between the different institutions and representatives linked to the climate change management instruments.30 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 1/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 31 current 2) Formal citizen participation: The ECLP proposal was submitted scientific evidence available a Public Consultation for 9 weeks to make it known to various instrument. climate change with the project country actors Climate Change Framework Law. the proposal from the country climate action and workshops with all the Regional Change Committees Collegiate body made up of representatives from sectors of the Climate. This process had 44 online participatory instances civil society In all regions of the country environmental matters of relevance and general interest of gender (50% women frame the citizen participation platform of the Ministry of the Environment in order to enrich this strategy by considering Environment (MMA)12 | through which 777 observations were received of the visions and perspectives of the diversity of representatives of the of natural persons civil society. guilds and weighted by technical teams be incorporated into the final document. • Interministerial Technical Team on Climate Change (ETICC): Organism that supports the Ministry of the Environment in the elaboration 3) Participation to strengthen the proposal: Then implementation and monitoring of change management instruments to have the ECLP proposal technical workshops that would allow deepening specific aspects of the instrument which are the Workshops of Indicators of Adaptation to change throughout the entire process has had the participation through climate Subnationals Moving towards carbon neutrality; carried out in all components of the process. the regions of the country for municipalities 44 online instances allowed to strengthen the proposal and generated training spaces that added a total of 926 attendees which 51% were women and 49% were men. that brings together more than 25 public institutions with the function is advisory rar policies and instruments for the effective incorporation of gender is part of the actions that the Ministry of the Environment develops rrolla in his role as technical secretary of the Interministerial Technical Team Throughout the entire period of elaboration of the ECLP website13 | and an electronic file14 | to spread the tool the ECLP register all the activities carried out and give transparency to the process. What's more of all instances designed in the 3 stages described in the ela- gender process in climate change management instruments»17 | and it 17 | https://mma.gob.cl/wp-content/ participatory training involved in the strategy. Finally of expert people a proposal for the integration of a gender approach for the instrument. 12 | Available at: https://consul- • Advisory Committee for Climate Action: Committee with a transversal vision tasciudadanas.mma.gob.cl/portal/ multi-stakeholder and multi-level that advises the Ministry of the Environment participatory (dates query/107 in the process of preparing the ECLP. It is made up of 32 represen- is available in Annex 1: Delving into participatory elaboration 13 | https://cambioclimatico.mma. so many gob.cl/estrategia-climatica-de-lar- local go-term-2050/description-of-ins- venes trumento 14 | https://changeclimatico.mma. • Ministerial Scientific Advisory Committee on Climate Change15 |: Committee gob.cl/estrategia-climatica-de-lar- adviser on the scientific aspects required for the preparation go-term-2050/file-electro- design and implementation of climate change management instruments nico-of-the-process/ matic. This Committee developed a report of recommendations on in- 15 | https://www.bcn.cl/leychile/na- nature-based solutions corporation and prepared a report vegar?idNorma=1153096 Previous ECLP proposal long view 02 chili term transition to development sustainable and inclusive no later than 2050 03 mitigation 04 adaptation Photography by Daniela Gormaz34 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 35 Long-term vision of the sectoral adaptation plans:18 | Biodiversity Infrastructure culture Chile: Transition to development (Biodiversity) Public (Water Resources) Sustainable and Inclusive • Climate Change Regional and Communal Action Plans: Developed Public Works (Infrastructure) by the Regional Committees for Climate Change (CORECC) and the Municipalities) citities no later than 2050 of the Sectoral Plans to be implemented in the territory and also Ministry of Energy (Energy) mo region and that have regional financing. The Action Plans river) Regional should be adjusted and consistent with the guidelines of the Aquaculture) Long Term Climate Strategy The ECLP will be the guiding instrument of climate policy to feed and Adaptation and with community mitigation and adaptation plans close it with the vision and long-term goal defined for Chile and proposed when they exist. Defense (Coastal Edge). in the Climate Change Framework Law Project arrive by mid-century to be consistent with global efforts to avoid the increase in global temperature as established by the Agreement from Paris. Chile has committed to achieving emission neutrality of GHG and increase its resilience no later than 2050 2.1 Chile unprecedented coordination and synergy effort in environmental policy welfare in the country. no later than 2050 this strategy tion of climate change with the highest hierarchy at the national level objectives national climate The ECLP seeks that all the territories and sectors of the national economy In 2019 the Chilean government announced that the country will become a car- incorporate climate change in their daily management and in their planning in the neutral bond no later than 2050, following the recommendations of the short draft Framework Law on Climate Change climate. matic presented before the National Congress for legislative processing with the aim of developing a robust legal system to strengthen the policy In this way climate as a state policy climate change subject of the ECLP will subsequently be achieved through neutrality no later than 2050 as binding and the obligation to review it of various enforcement instruments every 10 years to advance it. specific measures on mitigation and adaptation to climate change and related to means of implementation An emission neutrality goal not only means an important commitment to the sustainable development of the country Chile's commitment to firmly join the global agreements to maintain • Sectoral Mitigation Plans: they will establish the set of actions controlled the increase in temperature and measures to reduce or absorb GHG and not exceed the budget sec- nes made by the panel of experts on climate change (IPCC) in its in- emissions history raised by each sector. The Sectoral Mitigation Plans must- This is how this commitment becomes not only the most important goal- They will be prepared by the following sectoral authorities: Chilean Ministry of Mitigation of energy Public Works violates the ecosystem limits of its territory. This is mainly linked with the policies and instruments for the control of local pollutants • Sectoral Adaptation Plans: they will establish the set of actions given that many actions to reduce the concentration of said contaminants tions and measures to ensure the implementation of the objectives nants also have a positive effect on the reduction of GHG and other and goals set by each sector short-lived climate pollutants. co those sectors with greater vulnerability. The following will be elaborated-36 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 37 Title «Adaptation: Path to climate resilience» Achieving this goal implies sustained work for Chile along two lines in relation to the Sendai Framework of the UN in accordance with the provisions of the specific commitment in this equally relevant actions: i) achieve a sustained decrease National Policy for Disaster Risk Reduction19 | of Chile and the matters GHG emissions; and ii) increase and maintain carbon sinks. AICHI Goals of the Convention on Biological Diversity. The complexity will be completed the implementa- To get this of adaptation in the context of our country confronts us with the need for the National Policy for the of the national goal defined in the NDC and identifies management instruments to meet a number of conditions at the national level start with: 2019-2030 should be used and improved to achieve these goals in line with the established finds the Sendai framework for in the Climate Change Framework Law Project Disaster Risk Reduction the Paris Agreement and the Agenda It is necessary to recognize the considerable effort that will have to be made at the 2030 for Sustainable Development. multisectoral and territorial to ensure that policies are implemented • A solid scientific base of climate scenarios and projections of impor- and measures necessary to be able to achieve a sustained reduction in pacts GHG emissions electricity and production processes of consumption highlighting the importance of the circular economy. In relation to the catches • A broad and representative climate governance of the different enhance natural carbon sinks social actors types of ecosystem services they provide (conservation and protection of became biodiversity by disasters • Inclusive and transparent participatory processes address the specific needs of the territories in the face of the impacts of climate change and development expectations. 2.2 Chile no later than 2050 • Generation of alliances between the public and private sectors to optimize the design and implementation of adaptation actions. • Vulnerability and adaptation monitoring and assessment systems channel learning and permanent adjustments based on the new The resilience of the country the or dangerous disturbance by responding or reorganizing so as to maintain have their essential function time adaptability of the fundamental goals of this strategy. The increase in resilience must permeate national public policy will be achieved through actions to adapt to climate change those enabling actions that allow us to face this phenomenon tion of disaster risks minimizing risks and avoiding damage the opportunities that arise in the territories. With the above, the long-term vision in terms of adaptation and resilience In order to advance towards the construction of a country that is resilient to the effects of licentiousness, Chile must of climate change medium and long term intermediate goals based on the development of adaptation plans sector- water and food security regional and regional the development of indicators for its monitoring also in the definition of areas of greatest urgency to advance in the capacity ity of response to extreme weather events and in the goal of security hydric ity. What's more sectoral and subnational (regions and communes of Chile) 2.3 Fundamentals of 2.3.1 Basis in science construction of the ECLP ECLP's vision is built on science. the last report evaluation of the IPCC (AR6) is clear in concluding that the observed effect of climate change is due to anthropogenic GHG emissions. Gave- cho report is a code or red alert for humanity of the UN Secretary General To move towards the long-term climate vision described Ethics must be ambitious and take into account the messages delivered by the IPCC. The strategy is built on the basis of 5 main foundations that guide commitments with the long-term vision ron considering the 4 pillars of sustainability (economic tutional and environmental) with a clear basis in scientific information on climate change as shown in the following figure. available nationally and internationally and thus provide relevant information that contributes to the elaboration Figure 8 Fundamentals of construction of the ECLP of the climate change management instruments. This committee joins officially to the climatic institutions of Chile with the Bill Climate Change Framework. Due to the extension of the territory of Chile therefore different risks and vulnerability characteristics. The study and research mitigation of the impacts of climate change in the national territory has been become paramount when making climate policies. For this reason Chile through the Ministry of Science will create an Observatory of Change Climate and experts climate change data in order to take advantage of the existing information in the country. Having a climate data observatory will favor modeling predictive and statistical processes associated with climate change the elaboration of mitigation studies of economic and social effects among other benefits of scientific information. For this the Observatory It will have 3 components: I) An Integrated Network of Sensors and Data throughout the national territory which will initially include the existing instruments that monitor our territory and your data II) A Data Access Platform will integrate the Earth observation data various sources of such information (e.g. public services and centers research). III) High level governance and Technical Team. Source: Own elaboration.40 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 41 2.3.2 Climate governance (multi-level and multi-stakeholder) at the central level since in addition to collaborating with the President of the Republic in the design and policy enforcement The goals and objectives will consider the new and strengthened governance of coordinating the work of the ministries and institutions in matters of change. proposal in the Climate Change Framework Law Project that contemplates bioclimate a vertical (national and regional) and horizontal structure incorporating the ins- presides over the Council of Ministers for Sustainability and Climate Change state institutions and also the participation of non-state actors losing the importance of science. This institutional structure established as in the Bill and deepened also throughout the ECLP to a state architecture while remaining always having as main objective level and interinstitutional and permanent collaboration At the national level, different roles and responsibilities are recognized for en- The work of government institutions at the central level is supported stop climate change tional figure main links between them. A wide representation of agents stands out: Climate Change. It is also supported by non-state actors who con- people from the public sector or state-state (both central and regional temper representatives of the guilds and local; technical people and decision makers); Non-state and citizens in general from the National Council for Sustainability (academy and citizenship non-governmental organizations and the private sector). At the level of each administrative region Climate (CORECC) are in charge of coordinating the management of climate change Figure 9 Climate governance regional level tion of climate change at the regional level, promoting synergy with the national and sectoral policies. At the moment presidential delegate of the Climate Change Framework Law, becoming chaired by the Government regional pain citizenship through the Regional Advisory Councils show leadership on climate issues. • International negotiation Chile is a party to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate climate change since 1994 and ratified the Paris Agreement in 2017. As part of these agreements miso actively in the different areas of international negotiation that are generated annually in this framework. Participation in these instances requires a delegation of professionals from different ministries that ensure the necessary climate ambition and the relief of interests of the country in the different negotiation issues with a vision Source: self made of State that transcends the Governments of the day. 42 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 43 In this way and generate the necessary strategies that allow linking more than one issue to be able to integrate young people into the negotiation process. During COP25 negotiation in the context of this global problem. The Ministry of Foreign Relations and foreign nicos experts carry out the specific follow-up of the negotiation issues, selecting two new young people who applied to participate of interest to the country you have ministries: 2.3.3. social pillar Table 2 Negotiating team of Chile. Chile's NDC establishes a social pillar in an unprecedented way pla the synergy of each commitment with the Sustainable Development Goals ble (ODS) Area of negotiation Responsible Ministry and Gender Equality baskets and water security. The commitment of the Social Pillar is also part of this Long-Term Climate Strategy Adaptation (Art. 7) Ministry of the Environment do in the following chapters. Agriculture and Forestry Ministry of Agriculture In turn the synergies between this state policy and the 2030 Agenda for Development Science Ministry of Science and Innovation identifies to which SDG each objective and goal of the strategy contributes that can be included as part of Chile's progress with respect to the Agenda 2030 General coordination Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Chile. Finance Ministry of Finance Gender and Human Rights Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Ministry • Equity and Gender Equality environment river As has been evidenced Response Measures Ministry of Foreign Affairs (SUBREI) that affects all spheres of society on the different productive sectors and on the provision of basic services like the water Market and Non-Market (Art. 6) Ministry of Energy to all people in the same way that are produced based on pre-existing conditions of social vulnerability Loss and Damage (Art. 8) Ministry of the Environment that climate change intensifies. Gender inequalities and inequities are one of those conditions Transparency (Art. 13) Ministry of the Environment women's access to participation and use of natural resources (water at a fair wage information Source: self made. cultural and gender roles climatic ity Notably tion of specific trading areas each other and with other state institutions whenever there are implications relationships or common issues that must be addressed by more than one ministry. Sector Plans competent isms of Gender and the Ministry of Social Development and Family promote the gender approach and vulnerable groups. equity and gender equality. For that reason achieve the long-term goals of this strategy considerations of gender in a transversal way and the sectors must generate their own gender analyzes to identify their gaps and challenges Objective for informed decision-making regarding this approach. that or perspective and propose concrete actions that allow progress towards Reduce the gender gaps identified in the different climate change management instruments at the gender equity20 | national and subnational Gender equality; For this, the following objective and specific goals are proposed: Women's that Goals Year 2030 Year 2040 Year 2050 1) All the sectors integrated in the ECLP will count 4) All the Regional Action Plans 7) They will have re- 20 | In line with the goals of Dere- means of mitigation works that with an analysis that allows to identify gaps in the Climate Change gene- (PARCC) vi- duced the gaps Collective and Environmental rights of reduce negative impacts on nero specific for the design of plans sector- people Fourth National Equality Plan its development (Specific objective rials of mitigation and/or adaptation to climate change that identifies gender gaps in the different between Women and Men 2018 6.1) and recognize the contribution of tico (Sectoral Authorities Specific Framework Law Project – 2030 Climate Change). design of climate change mitigation and/or tion measures ensure women's access adaptation (Gore). at the national level especially peasant national and subnational and indigenous (MMA). water ability of natural resources urgent measures to face the ity of forms of local production dited for mitigation and/or adaptation (Regional Government nes to face climate change climate change and its effects - Ministry of Women and Gender Equity). 6) All management instruments 3) As of 2025, it will be reported how climate change has progressed at the national level in the promotion of an equitable participation of mu- and sub-national will integrate general actions managers and men in all institutional instances, responsive and/or transformative national governance and related to climate change management (MMA). Source: Own elaboration.46 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 47 and circular economy • Just Transition nities and sectors involved in the closure process and/or new uses of the spaces and infrastructure of the coal-fired power plants. A transition to a socially and environmentally sustainable economy and fair can be an important engine for the creation of decent employment social justice and poverty eradication. Goals of great importance in the • Environmental development and territorial approach: it will be promoted that the process understanding that climate change is an enhancer of inequalities of closure and/or new uses of the spaces and infrastructure of the power plants existing data Having a Just Transition Strategy allows to enhance the synergy negative impacts between Chile's climate commitments and the national agenda close link that exists between the climatic and socio-environmental such. • Participatory governance and public-private articulation: the challenges Chile's NDC 2020 a Just Transition Strategy that protects the rights of the most vulnerable establishing a model of local governance sustainable in the decarbonization process of the energy matrix and that and built through participatory processes of social dialogue have active citizen participation in its design and implementation. and that accompanies the entire process of closing coal-fired plants. This governance must be in coordination with the Governors This commitment is about to be fulfilled Regional of Just Transition has completed its citizen consultation process21 | the 16 in Law 20,074 and with the respective municipalities of September; so we are currently analyzing the comments in developing and implementing through participatory processes received and making adjustments to the document coordinated and articulated local strategies end this year. The document that was published during the consultation and existing private initiatives public clean in the territories involved in the closure and/or new uses of the meet to have people at the center and ensure that the transition spaces and infrastructure of coal-fired power plants. towards carbon neutrality in Chile incorporates a development fair and equitable social and environmental that improve people's quality of life environment in the territories where the infrastructure is located of the energy sector. The Just Transition Strategy seeks to have a framework • Active participation: Carbon neutrality and climate resilience is not of work to face the energy transition in the territories that the integration of the local perspective is key to moving towards processes participatory and that allow compliance with the proposed actions The Action for Climate Empowerment (ACE) in strategy. cas and strategies for mitigation and adaptation to climate change or other The Just Transition Strategy proposes a series of problematic commitments that require an important citizen consensus and participation that ensure the fulfillment of the objective described above to four pillars: bits of action. The generation of alliances between civil society public and private is the cornerstone for the design and implementation of climate change policies and actions guidelines and transversality of ACE. Each sector offers different possibilities • Transition with a focus on people: actions must be designed and executed through instruments in a participatory manner during the closure process and/or new uses as well as opportunities to assume responsibilities of the spaces and infrastructure of the coal-fired power plants. will advance essential to comply with the global commitments established by the in promoting a fair energy transition in the social and labor spheres Paris and national agreements that we have established in our NDC and ECLP. that promotes the training of job skills and retraining the private sector towards quality jobs that allow promoting the local development of the to innovate in search of solutions; and civil society has a deep communities and well-being of people. empirical knowledge of their territories at the local level22 |. • Economic development and productive development: progress will be made in facilitating Many of the climate change management actions will remain in the the conditions for the promotion of new investments and implements- sheer irrelevance if women tion of new technologies and productive opportunities (goods and services) and in their individual and collective practices they are not co-responsible 21 | https://energia.gob.cl/mini-si- cios) associated with sustainable development in the territories and linked to them. ACE goes beyond formal and non-formal education uncle/just-transition-strategy- 22 | Action_for_climate_empower- to its productive vocation ta-en-energia ment_guidelines.pdf (unfccc.int)48 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 2/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 49 capacity to act As of 2023 the formation practices and ancestral knowledge of local communities and indigenous peoples training and cooperation within countries and at the international level on protection of biodiversity put the six elements of ACE. to climate change with the aim of continuously improving and complementing the information The Capacity Development and Climate Empowerment Strategy based on scientific evidence with empirical knowledge of communities of Chile becomes local communities and ancestral peoples. Long-Term Climate Strategy that has the objective of "strengthening the national capabilities both public and private This platform will make this knowledge and experiences available to the public achieve the mitigation and adaptation goals of the country” to promote their incorporation in the design and implementation of the elements of the Action for Climate Empowerment mentioned in the different public sector climate change management instruments Article 6 of the UNFCCC and 12 of the Paris Agreement at sector level five components encourage other communities or members of civil society throughout climate action; b) Promotion of capacity building; c) Research throughout the country replicate these practices throughout the country and Science for Climate Action; d) Awareness and Education for Action so rooted in a deep connection and understanding of nature. Climate and e) Cooperation and Exchange of Experiences. These compo- your of climate change management and its long- and medium-term goals national public how to approach the development of the required capacities and the empowerment of their local knowledge training of citizens to implement actions that allow confronting territory. These participation processes will feed the platform climate change and achieve carbon neutrality and climate resilience once good practices and knowledge are identified that can no later than 2050 climate. b) Assess the vulnerability of local communities and indigenous peoples scenarios in the face of climate change considering possible solutions • Good practices and ancestral knowledge of adaptation typical of their culture and society Provide adaptation solutions that meet your specific needs and enable them to increase their resilience to climate risks to which they Regarding the good practices of local communities and indigenous peoples that are exposed. in the nationally exclusive considering the role of communities in managing climate change. This commitment is expected to materialize by 2023 In this context we have the local communities and the native peoples of the update of the National Adaptation Plan that inhabit territories rich in biodiversity and have knowledge an- assessment of vulnerability local communities and native peoples cestral and good practices based on nature that are a contribution in their fight against climate change and adaptation solutions. conservation the pressure of climate change on the ecosystems they inhabit makes them especially vulnerable to these threats. Said evaluation in the National Adaptation Plan will be developed through through a participatory process Considering the above and following the guidelines of the Paris Agreement, the technical and financial support of the Green Climate Fund is given. Measures and the advances of the Platform of Local Communities and Indigenous Peoples identified will be evaluated to be considered in the instruments (LCIPP) drivers of reducing vulnerability and increasing capacity adaptation of indigenous peoples. a) Make good practices of local communities and indigenous peoples visible. in the ration in the development of climate change management instruments at the national level and their subnational appropriation to achieve the fulfillment of goals • Water Security cost effective climate management. water security It is established in the Climate Change Framework Law Project and is defined as: recognizing the different impacts of climate change on the territories differentiated solutions to meet the long-term objectives established the possibility of access to water at a level of quantity and quality adequate for the country. This is key because it strengthens the vision of an integration gives care and use of time for health socioeconomic resilience against threats associated with droughts and floods and Climate prevention - PACCC) that allow the actors in the territories to contribute to the of pollution. construction of relevant commitments to their communities and circumstances. Facing the worsening of the water crisis 2.3.5. Nature-Based Solutions an Emergency Plan that seeks to increase the availability of water and improve reduce the efficiency in its use human consumption and food production 23 | Gob.cl - Drought Plan Drought.23 | This plan focuses on four axes or key measures: the use Considering the international literature (www.gob.cl) of salt water expansion of the coverage of the rural drinking water program Based on Nature (NbS) such as: of water in cities. actions to protect In the update of the NDC of Chile to 2020 two commitments on water security of indicators that allow the establishment of water security goals territorial and organizational; water management at the basin scale; and sustainable growth, delivering well-being to human beings and benefits to the of the resilience of the health services sector. It in those areas where greater urgency has been detected The country will privilege its incorporation in mitigation and adaptation measures. focus action with a view to a resilient country. tion to climate change that are implemented in the country in addition a chapter on Water Resources (See Chapter 5: Sectoral contributions at the sectoral level and integration components - Water Resources) that presents instruments in the NDC management commitments established by other sectors (silvoagricultural out country challenges in water These are cost-effective options to protect human consumption and sustainably manage systems and modernize the legal and institutional framework around water resources. that contribute to achieving carbon neutrality and increasing resilience of the country by 2050 in an integrated manner. Those transversal guidelines 2.3.4. Cost Effectiveness for mitigation and adaptation for mitigation and adaptation measures to consider NbS include: Climate change management will prioritize those measures that effective for mitigation and adaptation economic costs from inaction to adaptation; in the short nate the benefits of investing in climate change adaptation to strengthen NbS. resilience in the territories received locally for the implementation of global climate policies • Carry out an integrated management of the territories to increase the re- realize the importance of coherence in the design of national policies silence 24 | More information on carbon management of waters incorporating aquatic ecosystems in urban environments 25 | It is worth mentioning that during • Improve the management of protected areas and ecosystem services. blue in Virtual Blue COP | An Ini- and peri-urban and restoration of urban island hills. Fabric Project Processing tiative of Future Earth (virtualblue- Framework Law of Change of Change • Carry out an integrated management of water resources and native forests cop25.org); The Blue COP begins the concept of to materialize in Madrid – COP25 at the basin level. • Andean cryosphere: It is recommended to prevent direct intervention in the gla- Coastal Zone (mma.gob.cl) ciares and minimize possible indirect impacts of human activities processing process and issued the • Collect local knowledge nas and scientific information for decision making in these matters. of various ecosystem services recommends strengthening monitoring systems glacial monitoring and hydro-geological hazard warning system • Promote environmental education and research in NbS and services of glacial origin ecosystems. and studies to determine the amount and characteristics of permafrost and periglacial areas in the country. The Ministerial Scientific Advisory Committee on Climate Change contributed in this matter through the report «Document of scope: Solutions based on Nature» (2021) its incorporation in the climate action of the country scopes tation for the country. are alternatives to generate displacement axes in active modes promoting friendly and habitable spaces. • Forests: NbS to prevent forest fires fire prevention and forest restoration. sectoral contributions and integration components neria Water resources • Agriculture: Through sustainable land management highlights the generation and addition to soils of biochar derived from re- For its part waste from agricultural activity associated with crops tes and reduction of fertilizer use cultivation and improvement of carbon in grazing soils. enabling conditions for the incorporation of NbS in said plans. Specific- mind N5 • Wetlands: To preserve and increase the multitude of services that peat of the degradation and transformation of wetlands dales and the incorporation of artificial wetlands for carbon sequestration and its multiple ecosystem functions. Territorial fication as a transversal work. • Marine ecosystems: Given the importance of these ecosystems in the carbon storage marine systems (blue carbon)24 | in national GHG budgets the protection and restoration of kelp forests of climatic refuges with special emphasis on the Chilean Patagonia. • Solutions for cities based on nature: They stand out as alternatives to address a variety of urban problems those linked to the adaptation process ways and sustainable the green runners 03 mitigation road to carbon neutrality at the latest to 2050 04 adaptation 05 contributions Photography by Bryan Contreras56 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 57 forestry and reduce the uncertainty of said catches as indicated Mitigation: Road to Carbon the NDC in numeral 6.2 of the integration components. The NDC specifies In addition, the commitment of the forestry sector for the year 2030 on the way to Neutrality no later than 2050 carbon neutrality appointed by various state agencies. Carbon neutrality depends on a 50% of achieving maintain the carbon sequestration of our forests in 65 MtonCO to the year 2050 2 and goals that seek to reduce uncertainty factors such as: Fires Chile has established its goal of carbon neutrality no later than 2050 Forest in the Climate Change Framework Law Project an ambitious reduction in emissions by 2050 from 130 million will serve the general criteria established in the Social Pillar of Transition tonCO (in the reference scenario) to 65 million tonCO in the scenario- Fair and Sustainable Development of the NDC updated to 2020 2eq 2eq carbon neutrality river that considers that by the year 2050 these specific emissions considered for the integration commitments presented they are neutralized from the captures of our forestry sector (figure 10). for the LULUCF sector. On the way to carbon neutrality, the new NDC establishes the international goals With respect to the use of reduction certificates and the participation in means to the year 2030 in order to ensure the route established to achieve burning of transactions through international cooperation the path to carbon neutrality that Article 6 of the Paris Agreement is a mechanism that can allow integration component for the forestry sector (detailed in the following countries to implement mitigation actions in a cost-effective manner section) and in its mitigation component as well as advancing the implementation of new technologies defines that the peak of emissions will be reached no later than the year 2025 voluntary collaboration with other parties. This collaboration must ensure the that there will be a national budget of 1,100 million tonCO between 2020 2eq environmental integrity and 2030 2eq do to the rules (see Chapter 8). to 2030. For the corresponding period between 2020 and 2050, it is estimated ma that the indicative national budget will be 2,600 million tonCO . 2eq The economic evaluation of this exercise showed the benefits for Chile to take the road to neutrality (see chapter 7). It is worth mentioning that GHG26 | in Chile's climate change reports as mentioned in the Chapter 1. According to the IPCC guidelines of emissions or goal of emissions from international air and sea transport are not included in the NDC mitigation commitment contemplates specific actions to contribute to its reduction consistent with international mitigation efforts and participation of Chile in the corresponding instances to achieve global agreements in the reduction of said emissions (see chapter 5). It is important to note that after the IPCC 6th Assessment Report The latest IPCC reports confirm very clearly that the increase (AR6) countries are urged to make additional efforts to reduce temperature forcing that is directly related to accumulated emissions short-lived climatic conditions methane (CH) 4 2 13 2 of emissions seeks to encourage the development of measures and public policies ment of temperature; It is known as the global carbon budget (GCP). that allow a reduction of this gas that is mainly emitted in Chile In other words 26 | The GHGs considered are those from cattle raising and waste treatment. total CO that can be emitted into the atmosphere as long as a limit is not exceeded. Annex A of the Kyoto protocol: 12.5°C scenario of mean atmospheric temperature rise. This approach Carbon dioxide (CO) 2 of carbon budgets has been adopted by various countries in the world (CH) 4 2 Chile incorporated it in its commitment established in the last update rocarbonos (HFC) of its NDC considering the emitting sectors. (PFC) 6 Nitrogen trifluoride (NF) (this one for the compromise of Carbon Neutrality (figure 10) 3 It is important to clarify that the commitment to carbon neutrality last included since the amendment and maintain a carbon capture level of approximately 65 MtonCO 2eq canza not only thanks to the mitigation efforts of the emitting sectors of Doha in 2012) To achieve this, actions must be considered to increase the bioma- de GEI it is observed in the following figure. In this way By 2030, the forestry sector is committed to the sustainable management of 200,000 hectares. according to the provisions of the bill tasks that will represent captures of the order of 0 2eq sustainably 200,000 hectares 3 they must comply with 2peq to highlight the benefits of adaptation to climate change. This ECLP constitutes the first effort carried out by Chile by assign- in addition degradation and deforestation of the native forest by 25% by 2030 Doing actions such as the strengthening of management models in prevention r updates and definitions that contain the new NDC of forest fires and restoration of burned areas management of sustainability of the use of natural resources Figure 10: Baseline and Carbon Neutrality Scenario of emissions defined in the NDC (Chapter 8 of Transparency) 3.2 Budget allocation of emissions and efforts of sector-level mitigation The Climate Change Framework Law Project proposes two fundamental criteria: fundamentals under which the allocation of budgets must be carried out sectoral carbon emissions: cost-effectiveness and fairness of charges. in addition it is noted that emission reductions to meet budgets assigned sectoral measures must be complied with through the measures considered in the respective Sectoral Mitigation Plans issued to effect. These guidelines have been considered for the allocation of pre- assumptions made through this ECLP. Source: self made. The principle of cost-effectiveness is related to the fact that the management of the climate change will prioritize those measures that gation and adaptation The gray area represented in the figure above corresponds to the area under cos the trajectory of GHG neutrality estimated in the NDC of Chile accumulated sions and therefore to the GHG budget contemplated for the mitigation res- defined. respective period of time. In accordance with the provisions of the NDC assumption of national GHG contemplates the emitting sectors of the inventory to seek a fair allocation of loads greenhouse gas net turer for which it is not considered within the budget of issuer- with a gender approach and special emphasis on sectors tions defined in the NDC sector (as detailed in the previous paragraph). realizes that it is necessary to broaden the view beyond the cost-effectiveness dad It should be noted that Chile's commitment to work with budgets related to the opportunity and feasibility of the sectors and territories of carbon is established in the Climate Change Framework Law Project. ries regarding implementing mitigation measures matic sector development needs sector based on the national budget defined in the NDC. progress to optimally contribute to sustainable and inclusive development It is also worth mentioning that the Bill contemplates that the budgets at the national or subnational level (regions and communes of Chile). sectoral carbon positions may be updated according to the commitments 60 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 61 Both concepts correspond to the guiding principles under which From this 2-step process the methodology was determined sectoral responsibilities should be assigned mitigation capacity of the sector. The allocation process considers the po- total reduction potential and its respective cost-effectiveness directly to the sectors through the sectoral mitigation measures established in the Draft Law to carry out according to their respective faculties. capacity of action. The ECLP presents the first exercise for assigning cargo budgets sector bonds from the national carbon budget of the NDC between 2) Based on such allocation 2020 a 2030 both the international experience and the national reality. The methodology used was designed through 2 main steps: 3) To such assignment carry out by the different sectoral authorities Step 1: The evaluation of the information and preparation of the sec- goals provided that the country achieves the trajectory of carbon neutrality ex- torials. This was done through the support of international experts put into the NDC. that considered experiences from other countries existing in the country; the best available information on emissions and ni- 4) With this activity veils; and the processes and roles in the collection and use of said allocation of the emissions budget for the period 2020-2030 information which can be summarized in the following equation. Step 2: Socialization and confirmation by the secondary authorities toriales Equation 1: Calculation of the sectoral budget the methodology was worked on. Also receiving feedback that allowed adjusting GHG emissions said methodology during the public consultation and other instances such as the co- advisory committee for climate action. Figure 11: Sector budget allocation process. Source: self made. Previous sectoral allocation of emissions budgets to comply with the national budget for the period 2020-2030 arises in the same way as the carbon neutrality trajectory the baseline emissions scenario minus the mitigation effort Dear. And on the other hand it has the advantage that it considers in its construction the cost-effectiveness and load equity criteria established by the Project Framework Law on Climate Change of the emissions budget. Next technical considerations and decision criteria adopted cost-effectiveness and load equity criteria are considered. Source: Own elaboration.62 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 63 Stage 1: Assignment of responsibilities in the INGEI categories Sectoral Authority Category INGEI The National Inventory of Greenhouse Gases of national emissions in different categories interior since the latter are not reported disaggregated by each sectoral authority or Ministry. Considering that challenge of the INGEI to the various sectoral authorities contemplated in the Framework Law Project of Cam- bio climate Next 1.A.2.m. Industry not specified Table 4: Assignment of INGEI categories to the different sectoral authorities 1 B. Fugitive emissions from fuels 2.B.8. Petrochemical and carbon black production Sectoral Authority Category INGEI 2.G.1 Electrical equipment Ministry of Housing 1.A.4.b. Residential and Urbanism 1.A.4.a. Commercial / Institutional** 2.F.2. foaming agents 1.A.2.a. Iron and Steel 1.A.1.a.i. Electricity Generation* (Residential Consumption) 1.A.2.f. non-metallic minerals 2.F.1.c. Industrial refrigeration 2.F.1.a. Commercial refrigeration 2.F.1.b. Domestic refrigeration 2.F.1.e. Fixed air conditioning 1.A.1.a.i. Electricity Generation* (Commercial Consumption and Own) Ministry of 3. Agriculture Agriculture 1.A.2.e. Food processing 1.A.4.c. Agriculture / Forestry / Fishing / Fish farms64 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 65 Sector Authority INGEI Category Sector Authority INGEI Category Ministry of Transportation 1.A.3.a. Civil Aviation Ministry of Health 5.A. Solid waste disposal and Telecommunications 1.A.3.b. Ground transportation 5.B. Biological treatment of solid waste 1.A.3.c. Railways 5.C. Incineration and open burning of waste 1.A.3.d. Maritime and river navigation 2.F.3. Fire protection 1.A.3.e. Other type of transport 2.F.4. Aerosol sprays 1.A.5.b.i. Mobile (aviation component) 2.F.5. Solvents 2.F.1.f. Mobile air conditioner 2.G.3. NO of product uses 2 2.D. Non-energy products from fuels and solvent use Source: self made. 2.F.1.d. refrigerated transport 1.A.1.a.i. Generation of electricity* (Consumption Transport) Ministry of Mining 1.A.2.i. Mining (with the exception of fuels) and quarrying In this assignment it is important to mention two key points: 2.A.2. lime production 2.B.2. Production of nitric acid 1) Emissions associated with electricity generation are distributed in the different Ministries that have an impact on the respective electricity consumption 1.A.1.a.i. Total electricity generation* (Mining Consumption) as specified in Table 4 that due to lack of disaggregated information it has not been possible to adjust said allocation (Ministry of Health Ministry of Works 1.A.4.a. Commercial / Institutional** of Public Works). public 2.A.1. cement production 2) Emissions associated with Industrial Processes and Product Use 2.A.3. Glass production (IPPU) and Hydrofluorocarbons (HFC) Ministries related to the corresponding sectors of Energy in the case of energy consumption that is not assigned 2 C. metal industry to a particular sectoral Ministry. 5 D. Wastewater treatment and discharge66 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 67 Stage 2: Estimation of emissions in Figure 12: Marginal mitigation cost curve (MAC) of the NDC of Chile NDC reference scenario The allocation made in the previous step allows estimating the emissions accumulated from the reference scenario making a descent to each auto- sectoral authority considered in the Climate Change Framework Law Project. In other words is disaggregated for each Ministry Equation 2: Calculation of the cumulative emissions of the scenario of reference by each sectoral authority. Source: self made. Stage 3: Mitigation Efforts Source: Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC) of Chile. Update 2020. The identification of mitigation efforts contemplates the basis of the analysis Analysis of the mitigation capacity of the sector. This is directly related to the potential mitigation measures contemplated in the carbon scenario neutrality exposed in the NDC of Chile of the country to achieve such objective and therefore the 1,100 MTCO budget 2eq of emissions for the period 2020-2030. This information is indicative tive in terms of measures abatement meets the criteria defined above to determine the mitigation capacity of each sector and therefore be aligned with the cost-effectiveness principle referred to in the Draft Framework Law Climate Change. A decay curve or MAC curve contains the information on the reductions (width of the bar) and cost-effectiveness (al- bar height) of a set of mitigation measures. the following figure corresponds to the MAC curve presented in the NDC. 68 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 69 Table 5 Measurement Assignment Table From this MAC curve we have information regarding the cost-effective NDC tivity of the mitigation potential required by 2030 to meet the carbon neutrality commitment and therefore with the national budget of emissions for the period 2020-2030. 27 | Study developed by the Complementarily Inter-American Development Bank Together with the Pontifical University, multiple scenarios were analyzed to strengthen the potential emission- Energy therio MINAGRI MOP MINVU measures Universidad Católica de Chile and the Universidad de Mitigation to achieve carbon neutrality. The study showed GHG emissions Mining of Chile using the methodology the robustness of the country's goal although it showed that there are certain factors Robust Decision Making (RDM). of uncertainty so it is necessary to consider a safety margin Power Generation* - Co- Leader Involu- Involu- Available at: https://publications. to ensure compliance with the NDC. This safety margin is commercial distributed iadb.org/es/opciones-para-lo- nea also with the principle of equity to future generations seeking grar-la-carbon-neutralidad-en-chi- strengthen carbon budgets for the period 2020 to 2030 and dis- and Residential (4) le-an-assessment-low-uncertainty- thereby minimizing the uncertainties associated with compliance with the NDC that bre#:~:text=Chile%20busca%20 would result in a higher load for future generations. Specifically Modal shift Energy* - Leader Involu- Involu- reach%20la%20carbon C3%B3n%2C%20encourage%20the%20 tion of each measure is reduced by 10% in the allocation calculations. (4) electromovilidad%20y Based on the above, an assignment of each mitigation measure was made- Management Systems- Energy* - Industry- Leader Involu- Potential tion considered in the preparation of the NDC of Chile to the different tion of Tria Energy and Mining crado (2) categories of the National GHG Inventory. This exercise exposed in the previous subsection for the reference scenario of the NDC turns out to be much more direct and simple Energy* - Involves- Leader Involves- tigation has a clear scope of action in terms of its reductions. Electric taxis (3) What's more to make an allocation of these to the 7 proposed sectoral authorities in the Climate Change Framework Law Project In which areas do they have an impact? if the institutions with which they are directly involved see any mining to (4) result of your action. The measures considered in the NDC and in this exercise the level of effort that each institution can make as calculation basis implementation of these measures to the sectoral authorities must prepare their Sectoral Mitigation Plans Electrification Energy* - Indus- Leader measures to be developed and implemented to achieve mitigation efforts motor-industry tria and Mining tion established in the ECLP. The above (4) assigned sectoral authorities are mandatory for the sectoral authorities identified tified in this ECLP. Involved Leader Vehicles The following table shows the allocation of mitigation measures. commercial Energy* - created This assignment makes it possible to identify the sectoral authorities that have electricity Transport (4) with a leadership given its ministerial attributions and considering its role (1) implementer. This degree of responsibility is quantified between 1 to 4 Involved Leader institutions involved MEPS Motors Energy* - Industrial up to 100HP Tria and Mining (4) (2)70 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 71 Measure NDC Sector Inven- Ministry MTT Minis- MINSAL Measure NDC Sector Inven- Ministry MTT Minis- MINSAL MINAGRI MOP MINVU MINAGRI MOP MINVU ary emi- Energy ary ary emi- Energy thery Mining GHG sions Mining GHG sions Motor uses Leader Involu- Energy* - Co- Leader Involu- Involu- Involu- in industry Energy* - Industrial Geothermal Pumps and mining – tria and Mining (4) heat micas and Residential (4) Hydrogen (2) (1) (1) (1) Uses plan sludge- Involu- Involu- Involu- Transport Leader Involute Waste treatment crado crado crado load – Energy* - created sewage Hydrogen Transport (4) biostabiliza- (1) (2) (3) forest pain (1) Heating Energy* - Co- Leader Involu- Leader Involu- Involu- electric public commercial commercial and Residential (4) biogas electric ration (4) (1) (1) (1) Solar Systems Energy* - Co- Leader Involu- Assistance Leader Thermal - Resi- mercial dential and Public and Residential (4) efficient fer- (4) tilizers (2) Leader Involu- Renewable Energies- Energy* - Gene- Leader SST Energy Industry* - Indus- crated in electrical replacement y Mining tria y Mining (4) zo of power plants (4) thermal (2) Electrification Leader Involu- Biodigesters Involved Leader motive-mine- Energy* - Indus- crated slurry Agriculture copper estuary tria and Mining (4) pigs (1) (4) (3) Involved Leader Electrification Energy* - Co- Leader Electrifica- Energy* - Indus- crated motor-commercial mercial and Residential (4) (2) Involved Leader RT housing Energy* - Co- Leader Transportation Energy* - vulnerable commercial Public – RM Transport (1) (4) and Residential (4)72 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 73 Through such assignment of roles by indicative measure of the NDC Measure NDC Sector Inven- Ministry MTT Minis- MINSAL the bases were established for the determination of mitigation efforts MINAGRI MOP MINVU Emitting authority Energy for each sectoral authority GHG emissions Mining percentages of responsibility for each authority. These percentages were calculated as the total proportion of the degree of involvement of a institution versus the total score of the measure. This allocation is based Capture or use Involved Leader on the principle of load equity since it is based on the allocation waste biogas of emissions to each sectoral authority sanitary filling (2) (4) tion with the activity causing the respective emissions (e.g. emissions GHG from mining activity in the reduction of emissions of each sectoral authority considering if they are involved or can lead the execution of the different measures identified Public Transport Energy* - Involved Leader cades. This through the legal powers that the authorities have Public – Transport Regions and not going beyond what is possible for them to implement in practice. (1) (4) After this, applying the principle of cost-effectiveness Thermal use Energy* - Co- Leader Involu- king of the measures according to their abatement cost via commercial gas pipelines – Hydrogen and Residential (4) the reductions necessary to reach the national carbon budget of the 2020-2030 period established in the NDC. (1) With that Energy* - Co- Leader Involu- Involu- Involu- institution is assigned a proportion of the estimated reductions for commercial heating District and Residential (4) for each of the 7 sectoral authorities contemplated in the Project Framework Law on Climate Change (1) (1) (1) previously noted. Energy* - Co-Leader Based on this analysis of cost-effective measures New commercial MEPS and Residential (4) each sectoral authority mitigation efforts are key to action and implementation of carbon budgets as it will allow sectoral authorities Vehicles Leader Involu- Involu- advance in the elaboration of the respective Mitigation Sector Plan. The is- individuals Energy* indicative mitigation forces for the period 2020-2030 are key to electrical Transport (4) the allocation of sectoral carbon budgets for the same period (1) (1) It is also important to expose at * Energy as a sector in the GHG Inventory; corresponds Table 6 Indicative mitigation efforts by sec- to all activities that include consumption and production in the sectoral emissions budget fossil fuel of the United Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to develop GHG inventory. Indicative mitigation effort Sector Authority Source: self made. 2020-2030  2031-2040  2041-2050 (Mt CO) (Mt CO) (Mt CO) 2eq 2eq 2eq Ministry of Energy 35 - 43 149 – 182 328 - 400 Ministry of Mining 6 – 8 25 - 31 59 - 7274 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 75 Table 7: Sector allocation of the emissions budget of the period 2020-2030 Ministry of Housing and Urban Planning 5 – 6 13 - 16 32 - 39 Ministry of Transportation and Telecommunications 2.7 – 3.3 17 - 21 43 - 53 Reference scenario Indicative effort Budget Sectorial Authority NDC 2020-2030 of Mitigation of Emissions 2020-2030  (Mt- 2020-2030 Ministry of Health 1.9 – 2.4 9 – 11 13 - 15 (MtCO2eq) CO2eq) (MtCO2eq) Ministry of Public Works 0 Ministry of Agriculture 0 tions Ministry of Mining 180 Source: self made. Ministry of Agriculture 123 Considering the previous carbon neutrality no later than 2050 as science asks us sectoral entities should consider that in the following periods the effort that they will have to carry out will be more and more demanding Ministry of Health 53 of equity and cost-effectiveness, some authorities should take a greater protagonism in its mitigation efforts with respect to its role in Ministry of Public Works 48 the 2020-2030 allocation. This confirms the relevance of the sector allocation of emissions budgets to achieve adequate planning and action TOTAL (Meta NDC) 1.100 that allows to meet the goal of the NDC to 2030 and the carbon neutrality no later than 2050. Stage 4: Calculation of budget allocation Source: Own elaboration. Based on the previously proposed methodology and with the efforts of my tigation for each sectoral authority contemplated in the Draft Mar- climate change code emission positions for the period 2020-2030. About national emissions 1 2eq from the emissions assigned to each sectoral authority of the scenario reference of the NDC minus the respective mitigation efforts. It is therefore that once equation 1 is applied mind de GEI 2eq have in the 2020-2030 period for the country to fulfill its ad- wanted in the NDC of 1,100 MtCO. This establishes a country responsibility 2eq in its various economic sectors and institutions of such commitment which represents carbon neutrality by 2050. With which the pro- setup is shown below.76 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 77 Figure 13 Public sector coordination regarding the implementa- 3.3 Implementation Mention of mitigation actions of the allocation of sectoral budgets To comply with the emission budgets assigned to the sectoral authorities that each of them must prepare the respective Mitigation Sector Plan (PSM) where they must establish the set of actions and measures to reduce greenhouse gases sector assumption of emissions assigned in the ECLP. These guidelines also are also introduced in this Strategy sectors previously identified Mitigation Sectors assigned review. What's more for its implementation of cross-cutting and multilevel coordination of sectoral authorities and other bodies of the State Administration competent in the matter. Source: self made. From the point of view of sectoral budget allocation of emissions of involvement and responsibility of the other related authorities On the other hand with the execution of the mitigation measures provided. From the same company they are a technical counterpart in the design and evaluation of the prospective budgets (SNP) way of involvement they will have in the measures considered in the other MPCs in order to lead towards a collaboration scheme between them. essential in them tions and measures respectively through intersectoral coordination The ECLP proposes to identify at least three levels of action that include the development of GHG emission standards to the sectoral authorities established in the Draft Framework Law financing instruments at the national and international level. In a national emission projections Climate Change complementary local. These two levels of action correspond to relevant organizations implementing agencies of the State (such as CORFO to support the implementation of mitigation actions in the territories and private sector development) without prejudice to the participation of others according to the objectives and goals those that support and encourage the implementation of socioeconomic climate action. The SNP will allow established in this Strategy in the territories of the measures considered in the Sector Mitigation Plans climatic presents for them. prospective scenarios and measures be necessary the intervention of various organs of the Administration GHG mitigation of the State for their implementation. for this the necessary capacities The future implementation of emissions budgets presents challenges. at the Ministry of the Environment Confidence in your accounting well and establishing a system progress made by the country and the sectoral authorities in terms of their commitments. coordination and transfer of In this way information between agencies • The relationship between the prospective emission and relevant consumption processes. energetic. Specifically of Emissions28 | of Long-Term Energy Planning (PELP) of the Ministry of Energy gia. The latter aims to model and develop scenarios energy charts that include long-term projections behavior of consumption and future energy supply of the country terms established by the General Law of Electric Services. territorial authorities of the implementation of the emission budget scheme sectoral both instruments emission trajectories and future energy consumption Other themes sectoral meetings and provide key information for updating tricas. of the country's commitments on the matter. The transport of passengers by means of taxis corresponds to a • Accounting for the emissions budget based on the National Inventory, which is generally present in all regions of the country. tion of Greenhouse Gases. The SNI Chile provides the conta- cipally concentrated in the regional or provincial capitals. This me- bility of emissions every two years of the categories of each sector according to dida contemplates the reconversion of the taxi fleets that currently operate the IPCC methodology mined in this strategy that from said estimations it is possible electrical give an account of the progress in terms of the budget of each authority sec- of the reconversion will seek to identify that the reconversion of taxis will occur torial clear guidelines to the territories regarding what is expected to be implemented and where specific geographical areas • The measurement placed in the Sectoral Mitigation Plans. The MPCs «how» each sectoral authority will comply with its derived commitments • Mining: example of the allocation of emissions budgets mitigation measures included. For it llo of a monitoring system Copper mining has different direct sources of emissions and actions greenhouse gas established and thus check the progress of the respective commitments. of high-tonnage mining trucks (CAEX) In Chapter 8.2 Monitoring They are diesel operated. A measure associated with these could be their replacement Details of the MRV system of policies and mitigation actions are provided. for alternatives that operate on the basis of green hydrogen GHG emissions related to its operation in mining operations. Given that the copper mining North of the country measure would be mostly in that geographical area 3.4 Sector budgets no incidence in other areas of the country and territoriality • Energy: example many commercial and public buildings. According to what is proposed in the Draft Framework Law on Climate Change- Distributed generation has great potential for penetration tico of the macrozone The measures detailed in this will be carried out. This plays a fundamental role that the realization of the different actions has an impact not only indirect emissions of greenhouse gases from electricity consumption in the fulfillment of the goals at the country level territory Rare that the impact would be distributed in a large part of the territory. Nevertheless That is why in the definition of the actions and measures to be considered the implementation of this measure in the short term may contemplate that the in mitigation plans Solar generation potential is higher in the northern and central macrozones. the feasibility of territorial implementation and regional action plans that are in force and that specify possible measures or actions 80 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 81 • Housing: example new sales. respective Mitigation Sector Plan in the national territory of pigs The isolation of homes represents an important opportunity for mitigation efforts that will have a community and regional impact depending on the reduction of energy consumption due to heating effects and thus reduce where projects of this type were implemented the energy consumption in such use. By reducing energy consumption where there is greater livestock activity. gotic it is possible to obtain a reduction in associated greenhouse gases to the residential sector. In view of the above • Infrastructure: example a measure of this type would be located in areas of the country where houses are heated (a large part of the territory) The development of public infrastructure and buildings must consider I would have it in the central and southern macrozones the analysis of the life cycle of projects in order to minimize their burden in winter months and there are considerable pollution problems. structural and operational bonus atmospheric tion. energy efficiency must be deeply rooted pillars in the design of the buildings. In this way depending on your local renewable energy resources or possible solutions. tions based on nature that are applicable given the conditions • Waste: example hydrometeorological of a territory Product of the operation of a sanitary landfill organic solid waste disposal tanne and carbon dioxide These if they are captured before their emission into the atmosphere used as biogas for various purposes electrical. by the same regions and communes in their respective action plans which are established as a climate change management instrument The mitigation potential presented by a measure like this depends on at the subnational level in the Climate Change Framework Law Project. strongly on the different characteristics that sanitary landfills present. beneficiaries depending on the location in the national territory that they have in terms of the composition of the organic residues in them and the conditions climates to which they are exposed. The above 3.5 Black Carbon Component levels of biogas generation and therefore in the reductions associated with each landfill that implements an action of this type. • Agriculture: example ties and commitments to face climate change. carbon black (CN) the pig herd 2 food provided mix between their solid and liquid droppings. these slurries properly managed or nitrous oxide. for people's health. Considering both effects for both climate change and air quality. So An opportunity to mitigate such emissions corresponds to the implementa- tigation is important and has been considered as a national goal in the installation of biodigesters that allow capturing the gases emitted by the NDC purines of 2016. In line with this objective cogeneration plants can be the input for the generation of mitigation policies for local pollutants that will contribute of electrical energy and heat. Such electricity and heat can be harnessed to the reduction of black carbon. by the respective livestock industries emitters of Greenhouse Gases.82 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 83 Black Carbon in a long-term perspective Table 8: Expected reduction of black carbon emissions by sector. As a long-term view of black carbon emissions, we have different emission mitigation scenarios for fuel combustion Scope of Measures29 | 2030 Comments tables reduction chilean black. The scenarios considered in the long-term vision are three it is observed in the following figure considers all mitigation measures in implementation by 2018 corresponds to a scenario with mitigation measures focused on GHG (CPR) and which aims to achieve Carbon Neutrality in Chile Heat Intensification nary considers the above measures plus additional mitigation measures ministry Obras Pú- a reduction in demand as a result of the im- district faction carbon black focused of architecture) Figure 14: Trajectories of BC emissions according to the scenarios naries considered in the update of the NDC Generation terio Energy intensification of the use of renewable energies reduces black carbon emissions. Machinery out of Hydrogen in mo- The reductions come from the consideration Route river Public Works (Direction of road- New regulation bility) Mining of Mining trice use of electricity decreases emissions carbon black. Electromobility It is considered that the use of electric vehicles does not generate Transport Hydrogen Transportation in transportation is considered within the Generation sector. Source: Adapted from (Gallardo et al. NDC goal 25% This goal contemplates at least a 25% reduction Considering the forecast scenarios for black carbon emissions there is a sectoral vision for 2030 of the expected carbon reductions black and an expected percentage reduction of such measures Source: self made. scenario of expected reductions. Particularly district heating cation and new regulations added in the Carbon neutrality + scenario 29 | Measures considered in the exposed correspond to this scenario. update of the NDC of Chile to the 2020. https://mma.gob.cl/wp-con- tent/uploads/2020/04/NDC_Chi- le_2020_espan%CC%83ol-1.pdf84 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 3/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 85 Black Carbon Management in Chile I) Black Carbon information and reporting system 2022 Chile has an important battery of environmental management instruments- a) Biannual update of the Black Carbon Inventory according to environment for the control and reduction of local air pollutants with reports to the UNFCCC. Inventory will be updated accordingly like the MP 2 carbon black. Within these instruments, the sectors stand out quality standards. from air Regarding emission standards31 | of Latin America to adopt the Euro 6 standard for light vehicles diane and heavy. This regulatory advance means a substantial improvement in greenhouse gas emissions. black carbon emissions from transportation. added to this development of stricter regulations for off-road machinery and groups c) Black Carbon Emissions Projection System. It develops- generators will also mean an advance in the reduction of black carbon 30 | https://ppda.mma.gob.cl/ will be in line with the implementation of the National Prospective System and other local contaminants. Atmospheric Decontamination Plans that seeks to coordinate and standardize the prospective capacity of emissions (PDA)32 | 31 | GHG and Black Carbon Regulation Program in Chile. The system will have a range Improving air quality in cities saturated by PM2 Environmental 2020-2021: National publication included in the plans have a direct impact on carbon emissions official journal of the Regional Prospective Program. black Environmental Information 2020-2021 (mma. of the air in different cities gob.cl) II) Generation of knowledge 32 | PPDA – Prevention Plans Most of the measures included in the plans contemplate the reduction and/or atmospheric decontamination of emissions resulting from the burning of firewood (mma.gob.cl) measures with the replacement of buses and filters for off-road machinery. local emission factors for black carbon and other pollutants. nantes 33 | https://snichile.mma.gob.cl/prin- In relation to the instruments for measuring and monitoring emissions- main-results/inventory-black carbon nations (BC) nal-carbon-black/ I) The National Black Carbon Inventory 34 | https://sinca.mma.gob.cl/ BC emissions in such a way to verify the progress in the regional reduction of Climate Change and other tools to end. and compliance with BC reduction commitments is part of the national GHG inventory inventory system.33 | III) Black carbon measurements II) The Air Quality Monitoring System the concentrations of PM and other contaminants throughout all black carbon conditions and the extension of the measurement network to re- 2 Chile. further CN tions that allow to improve the local understanding of carbon black generating consistent time series to verify. Challenges to strengthen Black Carbon management by 2030 The ECLP strengthens the long-term vision in the management of black carbon and with a view to fulfilling the commitment reduction goal in the NDC black carbon emissions. Road to carbon neutrality and resilience by 2050 04 adaptation road to resilience climate 05 sectoral contributions 06 climate change management Photography by Bryan Contreras88 CHAPTER 4/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 4/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 89 Adaptation: Road to adaptability most suitable and cost effective. Later lution seeks to follow up climate resilience and incorporate learnings the resilience of the country of Adaptation: Atlas of Risks Climate (ARClim)» hereof Strategy. Considering the country's vulnerability to climate change important to have national adaptation plans to anticipate and deal with the current and future impacts of climate change. matic. The global adaptation goal set in the Paris Agreement (Art. 7) considers the strengthening of resilience through the increase adaptive capacity and reduced vulnerability to change climate loss and damage related to the adverse effects of the change climate (Art. 8). The Climate Change Framework Law Project central objective is to reduce vulnerability and increase the country's resilience against the adverse effects of climate change management at the regional level of its elaboration It is established within the Bill that the main guidelines are established towards climate resilience by 2050. This chapter contains the guidelines for the adaptation process and the definition of indicators 5 details the guidelines that the country commits in various sectors and components of integration and Chapter 6 details the guidelines in regional and local action from the territories. 4.1 Conceptual framework of vulnerability and adaptation Source: self made. The conceptual framework of climate risk35 | that we consider corresponds 36 | ARClim Adaptation is a development planning process at the country level region and commune to deal with climate impacts and risks purpose of reducing vulnerability You're from climate change. This process begins with the identification and evaluation of those who inhabit it. tion of present and future climate risks that affect the territories natural systems mation whose objective is to face and minimize the identified risks. The implementation and whose relationships are outlined below: 36 | The implementation of these measures can be aimed at reducing the degrees of exposure against threats Figure 16: Conceptualization of Vulnerability of the Fifth • Hazard: Climatic condition whose potential occurrence may result IPCC Assessment Report in loss of life in property losses sion of services • Exposure: The presence of people and environmental resources or cultural tively. • Vulnerability: The propensity or predisposition to be negatively affected tively. At the same time by all the non-climatic factors that directly affect the con- sequences of a climatic event (including physical attributes cials adaptive organizations and sectors to face adverse in the short and medium term beliefs Thus are the elements that can be modified through adaptation measures. tion one of these factors has uncertainty its estimation involves projections about the future limitations inherent in the modeling and the impacts on the various systems. Source: IPCC (2014 These uncertainties or lack of scientific certainty should not be used as reason for postponing the adoption of measures to avoid said risks or dangers. gros or prevent the adverse effects of climate change principle of cost effectiveness. It is recommended to integrate the risk analysis in each of the development phases of the management instruments climate change and disaster risk reduction in the elaboration stages 4.2 Guidelines Guidelines for adaptation at the sectoral level adaptation at the national level The prioritized sectors for Adaptation at the national level have in their set with 46 long-term objectives in this Strategy sectorial sectorially seated together with the objectives of Mitigation and Integration in the Chapter 5: Sector contributions and integration components. The objects objectives raised for the different sectors reflect response needs Similar The National Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (NAP)37 | has been until now the reference instrument for the implementation of adaptation to ni- • Strengthen sectoral governance at different scales of the territory national vel to what is proposed in the Climate Change Framework Law Project and consider- of stakeholders from each sector For the most vulnerable sectors, it is established that the country must have 11 citizens in the development of sectoral climate change policies. Sectoral Adaptation Plans in the Forestry and Agricultural Sectors sity • Deepen and broaden scientific knowledge Water resources co in the different sectors central government mandates they contained in this Strategy and incorporate climate change into the work of each sector opportunities that can be generated. • Reduce risk from the impacts of climate change of an integrated approach in policies and instruments These adaptation plans are the responsibility of the authorities vulnerability competent sectors in conjunction with the Ministry of the Environment and other relevant actors. changing ticks. After 5 years of implementation final external and be updated for a following period • Integrate climate change into sectoral policy instruments learning to date. on a territorial scale Chile has made progress in the development and implementation of these local plans. building capacities in institutions in their programs of the NAP, instances of intersectoral coordination have been generated at different levels. scales on climate change and strengthened in the Draft Framework Law • To protect Climate Change by promoting the use Although the development of capacities and adaptation at the natural resources sector level. it is necessary 37 | Plan prepared within the subnational framework is essential to move towards a resilient society • Promote sustainable productive skills in the fishing sector National Action Plan for Climate Change. The need to have instruments to face river and aquaculture change Climate 2008-2012 and approved by climate in a territorial manner is recognized in the Draft Framework Law on climate change in order to contribute to food security the Council of Ministers for Sus- Climate Change through the obligation to develop and implement and the sustainability of natural resources. Sustainability and Climate Change the Regional Climate Change Action Plans (PARCC) and Action Plans December 1, 2014 • Promote water security for human consumption and sanitation at: https://mma.gob.cl/wp-content/ and approved by the CORECC and Municipalities and provision of water for ecosystems and productive activities uploads/2016/02/Plan-Nacio- plans will guide their adaptation measures seeking to cover a wide contributing to the efficient use of water resources in the territories. nal-Adaptation-Change-Climate- range of requirements and specific needs This guideline is transversal and will be observed in compliance with the co-version-final.pdf long-term objectives and goals committed to in this strategy. other objectives tegy. 94 CHAPTER 4/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 4/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 95 Cross-cutting guidelines for adaptation in territories with other policies designed to exit a saturated or latent zone of air pollution in order to create synergies between both types of instruments. For the design and implementation of adaptation measures, it is The articulation of the various sectors and the different levels is fundamental administrative in the territory policy instruments synergies and avoid maladaptation. This coordination is in the hands of Disasters associated with climate change affect the country in a different instances depending on the stage in which the instruments are found. more intense and frequent ments give the losses and damages that these may cause Interministerial Climate Change Technician (ETICC) of adaptation planned early. of Climate Change (CORECC) Ministerial Regional Secretariats (SEREMIs). In this way to the main sectors that present a greater contribution to emissions of disaster risk should consider Integrated Risk Management nes de GEI y those who are empowered to submit their policies programs of climate change multisector that allows the introduction of mitigation criteria and to climate change in the proposed regulation. On the other hand Join the technical counterparts of the various Health and Welfare Administration bodies of the State with competence related to the issue of climate change and in that instance The National Emergency Office (ONEMI) of the Ministry of the Interior the instruments submitted to the knowledge of this body. in addition and Public Security is the institution responsible for the implementation in the the various sectoral authorities are represented in the plan Sendai Marco country in the CORECC through their respective Regional Secretariats of Disaster Risk (PNRRD)39 | ministerial multisectoral and transversal regional and local to generate synergies between their respective instruments. disaster risk as a strategy for sustainable development in the country. to the above ca in the preparation and updating of the various management instruments In 2020 ONEMI created the Table on Human Mobility of climate change sectoral organizations in the integration of climate change criteria in their academia and civil society. The table is preparing guidelines policies make up the CORECC and serve as the technical secretariat for said organizations providing administrative and technical support in the operation of this phenomenon in our country; guide the generation of public policies the same. On the other hand dination through the respective regulations that regulate national and subnational elaboration. In this way and updating of the various climate change management instruments of both the Sectoral Adaptation Plans Regional nal that generate synergies between adaptation and mitigation promote the use of nature-based solutions actions that allow facing the risk of extreme climatic events of the challenges of the table will be to generate actions that allow progress towards relieves the importance of applying this not of local communities and indigenous peoples of our country and public policies. ment available at: https://www. encourage the involvement of the private sector in the adaptation process unisdr.org/files/43291_spanishsen- Compliance with the adaptation goals of this strategy from the country. What's more with a disaster risk reduction perspective address vulnerability to climate change loss and damage. The National Plan for Adaptation to Change 39 | https://www.onemi.gov.cl/ environmental problems Climate loss of biodiversity and its ecosystem services with its National Strategic Plan 2020-2030 of land use are key instruments adaptation and disaster risk reduction give sustainability to the fulfillment of long-term objectives and goals. gender inequality is highlighted in access to participation and takes of decisions; ownership and use of natural resources (water in addition sea and good quality energy); at equal pay to climate change with RDD is essential in the process to credits; and to the information planning and ordering of the territory carried out by the various as well as information gaps on the impacts of climate change. Bodies of the State Administration with competences in the matter co-disaggregated by sex that serves for decision making; shortcomings in the such as the Ministry of Housing and Urbanism use of language and in the recognition of local and ancestral knowledge. and the Municipalities. Facilitation of private sector participation in adapting to climate change Commitments: • By 2023 disaster risk management (DRM) or public disaster risk reduction (DRR) in the work plans of the Regional Climate Change Committees that private companies participate in the planning (CORECC)- (ONEMI Depending on their activity and the sector to which they belong • By 2025 Linking Disaster Risk Reduction and Climate Change operations or on other components of its value chain on related topics (eg: human mobility) - (ONEMI Environment). carry out their activities or due to regulatory changes or patterns consumption of its products40 |. in addition excellent position with regard to visualizing and capitalizing on potential benefits of adaptation. Have a long-term strategy that establishes guidelines Adaptation needs of groups tions and priorities of adaptation delivers a signal of clarity for the sector 40 | Action Companies most vulnerable to climate change private tempting. Climate change will especially affect the most vulnerable groups aggravating pre-existing conditions of vulnerability. That is why the discussion between the public and private sectors in this matter design of instruments and adaptation measures should prioritize these groups advance in their inclusion throughout the entire adaptation process41 |. Through post your vulnerability of adaptation. in addition of the various climate change management instruments results in the country's climate resilience. development of participatory mechanisms that address the needs of For your part ties of vulnerable groups and allow their involvement in the management the private sector will prioritize projects and initiatives that present synergies of climate change. in adaptation and mitigation to climate change Indigenous peoples have a special vulnerability due to the re- in nature relationship and dependency with the natural resources that are being affected due to climate change ancestral knowledge can constitute solutions and contributions to adaptation as specified in Chapter 2: Long-term vision of Chile: Transition i state tion to sustainable and inclusive development by 2050. and impacts associated with climate change. in a complementary way adaptation measures giving in a better way the differentiated impact of climate change on men and women Solutions based on Nature risk factors can be used at a disaggregated level by communes or aggregated by region at different territorial scales. What's more associated with the various systems evaluated. It has been established as a fundamental objective as in this ECLP for adaptation and mitigation address from the subnational level. To do this, the classification report of areas that require greater attention according to the relative risk will be taken into account. prepared by the Scientific Ministerial Advisory Committee on Climate Change that they present. The diversity of threats and analyzed systems allow that makes an initial proposal on the type of solutions to be considered to install in various actors the ability to anticipate the effects that may the various sectors. In Chapter 5. Sectoral contributions and could occur in their territory and properly plan adaptation measures. integration objectives are incorporated objectives that consider them. What's more in the process of preparing and updating the Adaptation Plans Sectors that have started their process through the request to the Green Fund The ARClim platform will be maintained of the weather and studies have been planned to make it easier for the sectors to include them evaluating co-benefits economic tion the preparation and updating of the Sectoral Plans for Adaptation and the Regional Action Plans for climate change. The ARClim platform Due to the uncertainty and dynamism of the impacts of climate change, will go hand in hand with the system of adaptation indicators matic establish a roadmap with the relevant actors of a regular vulnerability assessment the role of the platform in this objective. ity of the measures and identify the factors that facilitate or hinder it in order to make adjustments for its continuous improvement. Considering the diversity of the national territory so many differences in terms of risk and vulnerability between sectors systems the impacts of climate change for decision making. With this pro The Atlas of Climate Risks (ARClim)42 was created for this purpose | alive in the form of an integrated and dynamic web platform with coverage for the entire national territory and communal resolution 42 | https://arclim.mma.gob.cl/ tive in the face of climate change of greenhouse gas emissions RCP8.5 of the IPCC (AR5). This tool uses the previous climate risk conceptual framework. mind presented and can be used in order to improve the design and implementation of adaptation policies and measures. From the perspective goes from the user Risk and Threat Explorer. Regarding the Risk Maps the platform contains risk indices formulated based on 52 chains impact for native forests coastal infrastructure biodiversity human minds is a tool whose objective is to facilitate access and download of climatic indices. This allows the analysis of new strings of impact by the different users. The impact chain methodology with which it was built allows evaluate the increase in risk due to climate impact the risks for the current period (1990-2010) and future (2035-2065). The indi-100 CHAPTER 4/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 4/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 101 4.3 Indicators for Monitoring of Adaptation Policy Instruments Report Through the process indicators, the level of compliance is measured of Adaptation in the long term of adaptation measures implemented in public and private institutions at different levels of governance. Using these types of indicators, the country has been measuring progress in implementation of climate change instruments since 2015 considering the objectives and measures established by the adaptation plans MRV and evaluation is an essential part of the adaptation process and measuring progress towards meeting them. allows identification of adaptation needs progress of the implementation of the measures the learning obtained in the evaluation that seeks to increase the country's resilience. how it looks more than one adaptation indicator serves multiple purposes (IPCC and in the context of a long-term strategy where there are conditions for adaptation at the national level and sectoral plans. Design of uncertainty relevance and trajectory. Being dynamic systems feasible as information becomes more available to give transparency to the monitoring and evaluation process. The MRV&E will be and needs change. a living tool evaluating the results of the implementation of the indicated plans and their During the last years efforts have been made to advance the corresponding updates. It will be publicly accessible and will allow monitoring of the implementation of adaptation plans reflected in the national reports that are presented annually to the Council to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change of Ministers for Sustainability. through Biennial Transparency Reports What's more of their impacts on the various systems of interest both current and projected that yields indicators that will allow determining which factors are relevant Result indicators (progress and effectiveness): to modify through adaptation Climate risk assessment decision making. The work developed and the learning obtained to date allows advancing To move towards a system of indicators that integrates the monitoring of the process For the construction of a robust monitoring and evaluation of the vulnerability implementation of instruments with indicators that allow us to assess the country's ability to face climate change and the adaptation process the fulfillment of the proposed objectives and the results in the process will use the ARClim indicators as a basis of adaptation. threat information and Risks for various systems according to the needs that emerge from the project. A challenge to be addressed will be crossing these types of indicators to measure continuous monitoring process the effectiveness of adaptation instruments in the process of reducing the adaptation. These indicators will allow us to indirectly evaluate the result vulnerability ted of the set that the country has committed climate change variable. A mechanism for continuous improvement will be established current evaluation and monitoring nua to integrate the monitoring of the instruments in the monitoring system process (implementation) and outcome indicators (progress and effectiveness) of results. for all climate change adaptation instruments. These types of indicators are classified into: • Progress indicators tion on reducing sensitivity to climate change (vulnerability) dad) two instruments for adaptation to climate change. This will translate • Efficacy indicators in a living tool of specific adaptation at product of the adaptation process. national and territorial. There is currently work in progress to advance the definition of in- 43 | This work results indicators 2020-2021 evaluate Capacity Building Initiative for Trans- Costs of Inaction and Losses and Damages yet to cover. In addition, depending on the main challenges and vulnerabilities parency (CBIT) from by the GEF implemented in the Ministry of private Environment. for adaptation state of international art; seeks to complement with new indicators Significant progress has been made in recent years in evaluating that make up this first set of indicators that will be part of the system of the costs of inaction of monitoring the vulnerability and adaptation of the country. to climate change ARClim has indicators for 52 impact chains evaluated constituting a first baseline at the national level it will be possible to build new chains of impacts that complement the important ones reported mation available. Although this information is recent and was not part of the IPCC Sixth Assessment Report (2021) Construction of existing sectoral adaptation plans will serve as the basis for future centuries to millennia the updating of these and the development of the next ones that are elaborated also from the Regional Action Plans and the Community Action Plans the frequency and intensity of heat waves and extreme precipitation Climate Change. agricultural and ecological guides the emissions For the development of this type of indicators cial in the future availability of water as one of the greatest challenges the effectiveness of adaptation. pending in Chile resources common to sectors such as water and soil “no regrets” such as Nature-based Solutions adaptation options that can be implemented over a time horizon (NbS) and Water Resources Management (HRM) keys in a long-term view. Progress will also be made in the development of current or sustaining natural systems. This implies that certain objectives of indicators that account for the relationship between gender and climate change which will be integrated into the platform of Sustainable Climate Risk Maps in a changing climate. This implies that there will be transformations of ARClim. mations and anticipate what are those limits to adaptation Commitments: associated days be more accepted • By 2022 progress and effectiveness) for each of the 11 prioritized sectors in terms of the costs of inaction of adaptation tation. future adaptation needs and propose the necessary transformations to compensate said losses. • By 2022 long-term for the construction of a system of indicators of vul- relevant inputs for decision-making in adaptation. nerability and adaptation and sustained over time • Commitment: broad and multi-actor in order to have a monitoring system By 2025, the first identification of losses and damages in the country will be made robust in assessing the costs of inaction agreed methodology to be incorporated into all plans • By 2025 and adaptation 05 contributions Sectors and components integration 06 climate change management 07 efectivity cost Photography by Daniel Pineda106 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 107 Sectoral contributions and • Transition of the productive sectors. Achieving carbon neutrality ity and resilience to face climate challenges: Guilds trias integration components move towards science-based sustainable development with the environment and local communities practices in the sustainable use of resources towards an innovative and circular economy actors and institutions strengthened in capacities and attributions to Chile's transition to carbon neutrality and resilience to climate change deal with climate threats as they arise. climate change over the next three decades will be the result of a series of series of social transformations through mitigation and adaptation measures in organizations • Human settlements and life in communities. People infrastructure and key ecosystems. This chapter presents the insights of long term conceived for said transformations medium- and long-term objectives and goals that commit to the process the challenge of contributing to the formation of an equitable society of national transition and describing the main instruments and institutional and resilient tions involved. local for the development of each territory advantages and opportunities in the face of climate change. This requires the coordination Those transformations should be done in an integrated manner. intersectoral dination generate synergies between them and in attention to the multiple interrelationships between integrated and effective management to reduce GHG emissions and adapt institutions and sectors that are part of the country's transition to the impacts of climate change. with the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Thus the strategy development process cross-cutting issues: • Ecosystem functions and Nature-based Solutions. the im- Importance of ecosystems and NbS in the face of climate change: Our country Figure 17: Outline of the cross-cutting themes covered has the challenge of recognizing and the multiple ecosystem services that nature provides to con- contribute to sustainable development and climate management. In addition maintain and increase carbon sequestration and sinks sustainable use and conservation of water resources and promote the use of Solutions based on Nature in the various fields of que- make national. Although this transition will materialize in a transversal and integrated manner the description of visions most Climate Change of the leading State Administration for the execution Said body corresponds to the one with the greatest powers for the im- implementation and coordination of associated public policies. Nevertheless It is important to consider that the implementation of the required actions for the fulfillment of goals and objectives demands co-responsibilities and coordination between different State institutions. For example in the definition and development of public adaptation and resilience policies. license at the national level collaboration between multiple state agencies Source: Own elaboration solutions based on nature and study the climatic vulnerability of different ecosystems and productive sectors. ductivos related to fuel consumption are mainly led availability of water for hydroelectric generation from the field of energy with other areas waste area/circular economy In compliance with the mitigation commitments of the NDC closely with certain health attributions in the field of transportation has an important role and final disposal of waste. These types of measures will be addressed emissions of GHG and black carbon to the year 2030 at the national level. also does jointly with the different organizations involved. a significant contribution in advancing the Social Pillar of the NDC Just Transition In consideration of the above Considerations of fairness and ambition in light of national circumstances you have visions the importance of the entry into operation of new lines is recognized energy sectors electric transmission and Circular Economy Long-Term Energy Planning (PELP) of the Ministry of Energy and tourism the expansion of the transmission of the National Energy Commission. In his com- Adaptation rapporteur 5.1 Energy tion to climate change for the Energy sector by 2023. This plan will establish the actions that must be fulfilled long-term objectives established in this document. Energy is presented as a base and fundamental element for al- achieve carbon neutrality in Chile by 2050 greenhouse gas emissions in the country total emissions in 2018 emissions mitigation. The energy transition that the country is experiencing tempers the massive incorporation of renewable energies of coal-fired power plants SDG Energy Sector ity angular. Goal 1: Achieve a low-carbon energy matrix by 2050. The Ministry of Energy has the largest participation in the design and implementa- Mention mitigation measures to achieve carbon neutrality. The in- Target 1.1: By 2030 44 | The Strategies Environmental Assessment integration and articulation of these measures is carried out through the energy project (according to the INGEI) in relation to 2018. (EAE) is the procedure carried out Establishment of long-term public policy instruments led by Goal 1.2: By 2040 lyzed by the Administration body by the Ministry of Energy tion of the respective State contemplated the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) that the considerations Regulations for Long-Term Energy Planning (PELP) environmental aspects of Sustainable Development by the development strategies defined for green hydrogen tempting mobility of policies and character plans and programs with direct impact on the fulfillment of carbon goals Goal 1.4: By 2050 general regulations neutrality such as the Energy Efficiency Law impact on the environment or Meta 1.5: Al 2050 sustainability Given the dynamism and enormous potential in the development of renewable energies - coming from the use of fuels in Industry and Mining they are integrated into the dictation vables in Chile of the respective policy and plan graduation of new technologies. A regulatory institutionality is recognized substantial modifications. solid that has managed to materialize a significant number of initiatives including laws 45 | See details of the measures in mind to directly mitigate greenhouse gas emissions.45 | Chapter III of the 4th Biennial Report of Chile update on Change In the context of adaptation Climate. Available at: https://climate in the Energy Sector (Ministry of Energy www4.unfccc.int/sites/Submis- national and international demonstrates that climate change will impact sionsStaging / NationalReports / Considerable Documents ments/574160_Chile-BUR4-1-Chile_ infrastructure for the generation and transportation of both electricity and 4th%20BUR_2020.pdf of fuels and their end use Objective 2: Establish energy efficiency as a pillar of development in industrial sectors cial Meta 4.1: Al 2030 Meta 2.1: Al 2030 with respect to the year 2019. Target 4.2: By 2050 Meta 2.2: Al 2030 Energy Management (MEPS air conditioning and refrigeration in the residential sector for other residential appliances such as televisions dishwasher energetic. Advance in the development of metrics to establish energy requirements (energy + artifacts) without sacrificing other needs performance data and good practices in the installation of equipment in the household sector commercial and public tower. case and geographic. Meta 2.3: Al 2050 (*) By clean energy with low emissions we refer to electricity compared to the year 2019. renewable Meta 2.4: Al 2050 low-emission fossil fuels such as natural gas (MEPS) for all refrigeration equipment and systems devices or technologies) do not have adverse effects on the health of people conditioned and air conditioning in the commercial sectors in home use. Meta 2.5: Al 2050 connected to district energy networks tion of the cities of the south central zone of the country. Objective 5: Decentralization and diversification of energy resources for an energy sector more resilient and low in emissions Objective 3: Increase the use of low-emission technologies and energy the use of green hydrogen Meta 5.1: Al 2025 of coal-fired thermoelectric generators of the national electricity system. Meta 5.2: Al 2030 Meta 3.1: Meta 3.1: Al 2035 tric of the country comes from renewable energy generation rrestres that the electrical systems must be prepared to achieve this. of new additions to urban public transport (buses Goal 5.3: We will work to generate the spaces that allow us to withdraw and collective) are zero emissions. and/or completely reconvert the coal-fired power plants of the electrical system Meta 3.2: Al 2030 national in the first years of the next decade. (such as green hydrogen and its derivatives Meta 5.4: Al 2050 in non-electric final energy uses. The country's electricity comes from zero-emission energy sources. Meta 3.3: Al 2040 public and private Ensuring you have the necessary infrastructure Meta 3.4: Al 2045 interurban will be zero emissions. Meta 3.5: Al 2050 zero emissions in the park for private and commercial use have the necessary infrastructure. Meta 3.6: Al 2050 emissions (such as green hydrogen and its derivatives synthetics) in non-electrical end energy uses.112 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 113 5.2. Mining Goal 6: Reduce vulnerability to climate change and facilitate its integration into development and management of the energy sector. Mining Meta 6.1: Al 2030 tica explicitly resilience and adaptation to climate change. For it tools such as scenario analysis and drought intimacy should be adopted You say risk against climate change threats the introduction of technological solutions example provision of energy services in emergencies. the next decades Meta 6.2: Al 2040 in reliability and resilience of the energy system (electrical and in the gas sector and innovative measures that allow it to increase its efficiency and fuels) to follow in other countries. small and medium mining. Meta 6.3: Al 2050 of risk and emergency reduction plans implemented in the sec- Possessing the world's largest reserves of copper and lithium energy tower. potential to become a key player in solutions to global warming global worldwide triage electromobility. Objective 7: Design and promote the use of economic instruments existing date science. decades national has been increasing Target 7.1: Between 2025 and 2030 2 eq carbon price by 2050. 10% of the national total as a result of indirect emissions associated with consumption Meta 7.2: Al 2030 carbon price instruments and other externalities taxes on emissions and uses of fossil fuels with market mechanisms or other instruments that are evaluated, such as changes in rainfall due to an increase in the occurrence of phenomena effective on that date and predictable. precipitation often causes flooding and landslides Meta 7.3: Al 2050 It is certified by schemes recognized by the Ministry of Energy. of mining operations and environmental pollution the health and safety of the workers. On the other hand tions of mining productivity. Faced with these threats in the development of solutions that integrate both the economic dimension such as sociocultural and environmental through policy instruments strategies and sectoral climate action plans. The Ministry of Mining leads the sector and has the greatest interest in advancing in matters related to climate change. This is demonstrated by the elaboration tion of the first National Mining Policy to 2050 August 2021 and (EAE) to ensure consistency of its design with environmental goals and climatic projects as a promoter of sustainable development and job creation in Chile agree on the country's commitment to a new development model mine-114 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 115 river that will have the challenge of maintaining the level of mineral production Meta 2.3: Al 2025 such as copper and lithium without losing competitiveness with the legal with full links to the communities and with a solid institutional framework. seawater desalination plants. further tation to Climate Change for the Mining Sector in 2022 according to mining agreement with the NDC updated to 2020 and a Mitigation Plan for the Mining sector promoting other sources that do not compete with human consumption. in accordance with what is proposed in the Climate Change Framework Law Project. Goal 2.5: Generate a net positive impact on biodiversity by 2050 to- These plans will establish the actions that must be fulfilled dance with the long-term objectives established in this document. as of 2021. Goal 2.6: The percentage of continental water for industry decreases mining promoting other sources that do not compete with human consumption. Next mining: Objective 3: Minimize two and critical of the mining activity. SDG Mining Sector Goal 3.1: It does not have critical tailings for the population by 2030. Objective 1: Develop strategies and/or projects collaboratively Goal 3.2: Have integrated monitoring and information programs directly from surrounding communities and indigenous peoples. up-to-date information on active deposits with a risk approach. Goal 1.1: Carry out a process of participation with all indigenous peoples. - 3.2.1: To the year 2030 according to ILO Convention 169, generating a chapter in- mining have a Comprehensive Monitoring Plan that will report information team that identifies the main challenges and establishes proposals tion to SERNAGEOMIN relative to physical and chemical stability. concrete aspects of mining with indigenous peoples. - 3.2.2: By 2030, 100% of active tailings from large-scale mining will have a Construction Management System Integral (SGCOM). Objective 2: Minimize the environmental effects by harmonizing the development of the mining activity with the environment mining and nature-based solutions to adapt to climate change. other forms of deposit establishing a percentage of reduction to the year 2022 and complying to 2030. Meta 2.1: Al 2022 be your way transfer or covering with material from clearings and/or rubble. Goal 2.2: Provides and facilitates information regarding the mi- neros keep glaciers by 2025. - 2.2.1: As of 2022 tics for the development of mining projects in glaciological environments. - 2.2.2: By 2025 between Sernagiomin and the Glaciology Unit of the DGA together with the Ministry of the Environment regarding mining projects and their relationship with the glaciological environment.116 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 117 Goal 4: Be at the forefront of climate change mitigation by promoting supply-based Goal 6: Lead the circular economy model with a focus on developing local solutions in renewable energy sources tion (R+D+i) for the use of low or neutral technologies in emissions. Meta 6.1: Al 2022 Goal 4.1: Generate zero emission fleet plans by 2025 for the large mine- in line with the NDC commitments. To the year 2025 estuary and start implementation of zero emission fleet by 2030. of multisectoral work; circularity study; and traffic indicators laridad. * - 4.1.1: By 2025 zero emission fleets for both light and cargo vehicles. non miners - 4.4.2: By 2030 secondary For it zero emission. implementation to generate value from mining waste. Meta 4.2: Al 2030 (*) It is oriented to suppliers 50% CO emissions. 2eq in 2021. Meta 4.3: Al 2030 mineral comes from renewable sources Target 4.4: Establish greenhouse gas emission targets (GEI) de alcance 1 monitoring and update. - 4.4.1: By 2030 - 4.4.2: To 2050 Meta 4.5: Al 2050 and audits for energy efficiency. Objective 5: Incorporate criteria for adaptation and risk to climate change in the design and operation of mining operations with a multidisciplinary and local focus (considering all the infrastructure necessary: high mountain and coastal tasks). Meta 5.1: Al 2022 Bio-Climate of the Mining Sector in line with the Paris Agreement and PANCC and its subsequent monitoring and updating every 5 years. Meta 5.2: Al 2025 gic of the mining sector technological reference for climate change.118 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 119 5.3 Forestry and agriculture living in rural territories their comprehensive development of a paradigm that conceives public action with a territorial and international approach. integrated at different levels The forestry and agricultural sector has a vision of 2050 private and civil society. Thus sustainable development of current and future generations greater territorial balance in the country agri-food resilient to the effects of climate change and low in emissions sustainable development of its smaller populated settlements. Additional- GHG emissions by making efficient and sustainable use of natural resources mind to ensure food production that considers an area of Climate Change in its 5 pillars46 | and that incorporates a joint vision of adaptation and mi- the Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Forestry and Agriculture sector tigation in the territory and production systems. The sector must be ca- will end in 2022. peace of adapting to future climatic conditions For your part and extreme events NAGRI of the most vulnerable farmers. In the forest field 2013 in the National Strategy for Climate Change and Vegetation Resources and will increase the sector's net capturing role of GHG (ENCCRV) adaptive and resilient tional contribute to both mitigation and adaptation and degradation of native forests you characteristics of the territory vegetative; as well as promote recovery vulnerable. It is important and necessary to advance in financial instruments generation and sustainable management of these native resources of Chile. that allow progress in the agricultural challenges restoration and sustainable management of forests It will contribute to the fulfillment of forestry mitigation commitments tions to achieve the commitments made. such of the NDC GHG emissions for agriculture correspond mostly (55%) to an increase in GHG absorption by 2030. In its Adaptation component enteric fermentation and manure management agricultural ones.47 | For your part to capture and sequester large amounts of CO through the accumulation- sector must meet tion of aerial and underground biomass mulled on the ground. In this way Next land and forestry (LULUCF) is the only sector in the National GHG Inventory contribution to the SDGs: which remains as a net sink for the 1990-2018 series. In this last year reaches -63,992 kt CO 2eq biomass in native forest renewal and in forest plantations. This ca- capacity of the LULUCF sector in absolute terms of the country by 2050. Objective 1: Create and strengthen institutional and territorial capacities in the forestry sector One of the main climatic threats that affects the sector is the decrease in precipitation and increase in average temperatures makes the sector highly vulnerable to climate change. This more intense and frequent extremes and north of the country since 2007 the MINAGRI institutions and the regional technical committees for increased soil degradation climate change in the forestry-agricultural sector.48 | go pests and diseases In this context to climate change flow regulation and water security. 46 | Availability (1) 48 | For plan development (2) You must first run a diagnostic biological transformation of food (4) of Agriculture (MINAGRI) skills gaps. and stability (5) relevant to the objectives of this strategy. Among these stands out the Poli- National Rural Development Policy since May 5, 2020 47 | INGEI Information Meta 1.2: Al 2025 in adaptation to climate change for male and female producers and industry professionals for small farmers in all regions of the country. 49| adaptation measures to the change of food of agricultural origin. Meta 1.3: Al 2025 des in climate change mitigation in the sector. water to small producers Meta 1.4: Al 2030 at least 4 annual trainings of gender and climate change and incorporates traditional knowledge are intended for training and/or for the sector. In collaboration with the Ministry of the Environment. and climate change. OAU strengthening Meta 1.5: Al 2030 in climate change adaptation. summons in exchange matters by the ministry. Meta 1.6: Al 2030 producers and producers in mitigating emissions in the sector. collaboration with the Ministry of GHG emissions abatement (activated sludge plant Meta 1.7: Al 2050 who are users of MINAGRI climate Meta 1.8: Al 2050 tions of MINAGRI and the regional technical committees on climate change to develop their standards. In collaboration with the Ministry of the Environment of the forestry and agricultural sector. Environment. Meta 3.5: Al 2025 of climate change in programs for agro-environmental improvement of the soils. Objective 2: Promote R&D&i and rural extension that contribute to climate action to develop Goal 3.6: By 2025 a resilient and low-emission agriculture and forestry sector Food Loss and Waste (FW) the reduction of emissions. Meta 3.7: Al 2025 Meta 2.1: Al 2025 in climate change mitigation aligned with the Technology Development and Transfer Strategy organic gica for Climate Change of the Ministry of Science. Meta 3.8: Al 2025 Meta 2.2: Al 2025 in cattle farming. of MINAGRI on climate change. Meta 3.9: Al 2030 Meta 2.3: Al 2025 and surveys of the Forestry and Agricultural Sector. novation for adaptation to climate change. Meta 3.10: Al 2030 Meta 2.4: Al 2025 efficient use of nitrogenous fertilizers. novation for climate action in the Productivity Promotion Fund Meta 3.11: Al 2030 FOMPRO of the transfer from MINAGRI to CORFO. managers installed in the pig sector compared to 2021.* Meta 2.5: Al 2030 Meta 3.12: Al 2030 del MINAGRI. sustainability standards in the first 3 subsectors Meta 2.6: Al 2030 standards in 3 additional subsectors. Meta 2.7: Al 2030 Meta 3.13: Al 2030 novation for climate action tion in agro-environmental soil improvement programs climate change mitigation. the incorporation of new practices. Meta 2.8: Al 2050 del MINAGRI. Meta 2.9: Al 2050 Meta 2.10: Al 2050 innovation for climate action.122 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 123 Meta 3.14: Al 2030 of prevention and reduction of PDA Objective 5: Strengthen the institutionality in climate change of the Ministry of agriculture. Meta 3.15: Al 2030 NAGRI climate bio. Meta 5.1: Al 2025 Meta 3.16: Al 2030 Climate (CTRCC) of the Ministry of Agriculture formalized and operational route for carbon neutrality in cattle farming. articulated with the regional Climate Change Committees. Meta 3.17: Al 2050 Meta 5.2: Al 2025 (*) This goal considers medium and large companies in the sector. livestock in operational climate change. Meta 5.3: Al 2025 Meta 5.4: Al 2025 to the strategic importance of the sector Objective 4: Reduce vulnerability and generate resilience in the agricultural and forestry sector interagency political and technical dination promoting the implementation of adaptation measures to climate change and evaluation of sectoral public policies. food safety. Meta 5.5: Al 2030 Goal 4.1: Implement the Climate Change Adaptation Plan of the regional technical committees on climate change of MINAGRI operational agricultural and forestry tor 2023-2027 develop regional sectoral policies. Meta 4.2: Al 2025 of the Forestry and Agricultural Sector. in climate change. Meta 4.3: Al 2025 MINAGRI services that considers a focus on climate change in coor- the 12 MINAGRI services coordination with the Ministry of Public Works and the Ministry of the Environment. Environment.* Target 4.4: By 2025 key plant species for adaptation and mitigation to climate change. that allow positioning the role of vegetation resources Meta 4.5: Al 2025 with climate action considerations. certification Meta 4.6: Al 2030 National Climate Change Program for the Forestry and Agricultural Sector (PANCC SAP 2023-2027) Objective 6: Promote initiatives focused on avoiding and/or reducing deforestation and degradation public-private character. tion of vegetation resources Meta 4.7: Al 2030 reducing the occurrence and risk of forest fires to achieve harmonious growth voagropecuario. economic Meta 4.8: Al 2030 Update of the MINAGRI water resources action plan. Meta 4.9: Al 2030 by region with climate action considerations. and deforestation of the native forest by 25% Meta 4.10: Al 2050 del MINAGRI. Meta 6.2: Al 2030 (*) The plan will be aligned with the NDC the Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Water Resources sector has to 2030 in order to generate the knowledge to establish future strategies and with the Strategic Plans for Water Resources in Basins the following measures: Comprehensive irrigation studies for areas of expansion and response to forest fires. of the dry land (O'Higgins Regions Meta 6.3: Al 2030 Araucania Magnitude residues (greater than 200 hectares). * increasing irrigation efficiency124 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 125 Meta 6.4: Al 2050 of the forestry sector due to degradation and deforestation of the native forest al- ro and with emphasis on local communities and native peoples reached by the year 2030. rights of people and their cultural heritage. (*) Avoided Damage: Analysis of management in prevention and mitigation tasks preparedness for response and response (control and extinction) to fire Target 9.1: By 2030 forest god the potential of free-spreading fire. more transparent incentives existing gender gaps. The above of the projects and initiatives related to the ENCCRV of genre. Objective 7: Promote the management and conservation of native vegetation resources (forests and xerophytic formations) and wetlands ecosystemic of process. The state indigenous and peasant Meta 7.1: Al 2030 institutionalized and accepted by all. The former by means of 200,000 hectares of native forests. in 100% of the projects and initiatives related to the ENCCRV Meta 7.2: Al 2050 environmental and social safeguards will be applied. the necessary areas of native forests trality committed in the NDC. Objective 8: Promote initiatives that increase the creation of forests and permanent cover of vegetation resources in priority areas for restoration at landscape scale 5.4 Fisheries and aquaculture resilience and reducing the vulnerability of communities and territories. To increase the adaptability and resilience of the sector to change Meta 8.1: Al 2021 bio climate of landscapes hydrobiological by applying the precautionary approach tion of the ecosystem approach in fisheries and aquaculture management with greater social vulnerability of the marine ecosystems in which these resources exist. Meta 8.2: Al 2030 100,000 hectares correspond to permanent forest cover least 70,000 hectares with native species. Recovery and afforestation nistration for a fishery and aquaculture It will be carried out on suitable land, preferably for forestry and/or in areas and socio-economic conservation priorities cided in the Chilean NDC updated to 2020 – LULUCF – Forests (I5). through an effective participation of strategic agents of the sector Meta 8.3: Al 2050 forestry sector to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 committed to the impacts of climate change and that allows risk reduction in the NDC. and successful management for the adaptation and resilience of the sector. physical conditions 50 | For the purposes of the application of in which life exists and develops this goal Mention of its goals in the area of Priority Conservation Sites of action of the forestry sector is for The National Commission of the Environment increase in the temperature of the oceans and for the consequent changes defined by legal attributions Environment in this matter. It will be understood that the physiological limits of the species are established directly in the Supreme Decree. Wetlands as «Associated Ecosystems- N°82 ciated to water-saturated substrates Agriculture. Law No. 20,283. ce towards coastal and estuarine areas temporarily or permanently Artisanal fishing will also be affected by the impacts of hydraulic events. • General Law on Fisheries and Aquaculture and its Regulations. extreme weather conditions on the coasts of days of operation and of the coastal infrastructure to support the activity • Law of Caletas. extractive. Regarding aquaculture increased risks of biomass/production loss fresh water supply due to an increase in diseases and parasitism and due to a greater frequency/mag- mo nitude of HAB events (harmful algal blooms) light intensity for phytoplankton; losses due to destruction of infrastructure The NDC establishes that the Climate Change Adaptation Plan will be updated by increased frequency and magnitude of extreme events. Tico acidification for the Fisheries and Aquaculture sector in 2022. This plan and its future updates from the ocean is also considered a threat to farmed species in particular molluscs and crustaceans. further resources that increase the risk for the sector to be affected by the impacts of climate change. Next Along with establishing the scientific basis for the impact of climate change, contribution to the SDGs: in fishing and aquaculture and thus contribute to the sustainability of the sector aspects of governance must be considered, such as decision-making of decisions ture contains (National Fisheries Council FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE SECTOR SDG National Aquaculture Session Fisheries and Aquaculture Objective 1: Generate and have knowledge and scientific information for adaptation to climate ro bioclimate and increased sustainability of fishing and aquaculture thor; the integration of native peoples; the creation and strengthening local foundation spaces for the broad and effective participation of local communities of decision. fisheries and aquaculture; sectoral and intersectoral coordination to different levels and improve control. Goal 1.1: Annually propose and develop research on aspects keys for the adaptation and mitigation of climate change in the sector Regarding intersectoral coordination and maintain adequate and effective articulation with other related sectors, such as the Comprehensive Advisory Program for Fisheries and Aquaculture From water resources and ocean on issues of conservation and sustainable use of ecosystems and the management of Artisanal and Small-Scale Aquaculture (INDESPA). to territorial Meta 1.2: Al 2025 It is particularly relevant that the measures that are designed to meet teroperable the proposed goals and objectives are focused on local communities vadas and take into account socio-cultural aspects and other aspects such as the de- development of the best possible scientific information for the construction of lines the impacts of climate change and identify indicators for taking base marine-coastal; and the education and with the Climate Change Observatory (OCC) and the Integrated System The Undersecretary of Fisheries and Aquaculture of Observation of the Chilean Ocean (SIOOC). ment and Tourism is in charge of the matter and has an Adaptation Plan to climate change in fishing and aquaculture is in the process of being updated. Other relay management instruments vancia are:128 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 129 Target 4.2: The fishing and aquaculture sector is trained and informed about Objective 2: Strengthen governance for adaptation and resilience of fisheries and aquaculture risks associated with climate change consistent with conservation to climate change at the national level and sustainable use of resources under the ecosystem and precautionary approach. with a gender approach Goal 4.3: The risks of climate change are incorporated into the Design and implementation of fisheries management plans with a focus Goal 2.1: By 2030, capacities to adapt to change are strengthened ecosystemic climate in 70% of the scientific-technical committees and the committees Goal 4.4: Provide annually fisheries management and national aquaculture. Sectoral training for updating the Climate Risk Atlas. Goal 2.2: By 2030 it is promoted Meta 4.5: Al 2030 50% of representatives of the main unions of the fishing industry areas suitable for aquaculture considering risks from climate change and aquaculture in matters of adaptation and mitigation of climate change. tico under the framework of an ecosystem approach to aquaculture. Meta 2.3: Al 2030 share actions and aquaculture current. Objective 5: Promote the diversification of livelihoods and sustainable productive practices Meta 2.4: Al 2030 tion to climate change of fisheries and aquaculture in authorities to climate change. regional Goal 5.1: Annually to support the diversification of livelihoods and practices sustainable productive activities of dependent vulnerable communities Objective 3: Develop nature-based solutions and strengthen the application of the approach of fishing and aquaculture. ecosystem in fishing and aquaculture. Meta 5.2: Al 2030 scale of 30% of the most vulnerable coves are trained instead Meta 3.1: Al 2025 climate and sustainable management of brown macroalgae ecosystems. tics and productive diversification as adaptation and mitigation measures Meta 3.2: Al 2030 to climate change. the ecosystem approach conservation and sustainable use of resources economic and social and the increase in the resilience of the sector. Goal 3.3: By 2050, 100% of the Plans are identified and incorporated in Objective 6: Contribute to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and the goals General Administration of Marine Protected Areas National Carbon Neutrality and Resilience Actions. related to co-benefits in mitigation and adaptation to change climate. Target 6.1: By 2030 there are estimates of the carbon footprint of the activity national fisheries and aquaculture. Meta 6.2: Al 2030 Objective 4: Design and apply an integrated risk approach in policies and instruments create capacities that allow reducing CO emissions and other that contemplate and integrate other different threats and impacts in the fishing and aquaculture sector 2 greenhouse gases in the fishing and aquaculture sector. to climatic ones. Meta 6.3. Al 2030 fisheries and activities related to aquaculture. Meta 4.1: Al 2030 in coastal areas (economic for the quality of life of dependent coastal communities of the fishing activity in a direct or complementary way).130 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 131 5.5 Waste and circular economy • National Organic Waste Strategy: The Ministry of the Environment Environment promoted through a participatory process for the preparation of this instrument that proposes as a goal 51 | OECD (2021) Municipal data Chile currently faces the challenge of moving towards an economic model for the recovery of organic waste generated at the municipal level waste. more sustainable and efficient micro gaps 52 | MMA (2020) Fourth Report Bie- on waste. Between the year 2000 and 2017 final update of Chile on municipal duos per capita by 49%51 | . Said residues are hardly apart from having infrastructure Climate Change valued rolling a 4 53 | OECD (2021) Material pro- increased by more than 5 times since 1990 and 23% between 2016 and 2018.52 | harnessing the nutrients tivity (indicator). Available in: Added to this is the existence of numerous illegal micro dumps and landfills. https://data.oecd.org/materials/ma- that generate serious problems for the environment and the quality of life material-productivity.htm of people. The Circular Economy will contribute to the fulfillment of the commitments NDC mitigation 54 | EMF (2019) Climate change – The construction and industrial manufacturing sectors are large generators of Integration as an element that contributes comprehensively to both the How the circular economy tackles greenhouse gas emissions. In terms of material productivity climate change Chile presents the lowest value of the OECD countries.53 | Adding to this presents a low rate of recovery of household organic waste more than 99% of which end up in final disposal sites, generating their contribution to climate change mitigation and adaptation. methane emissions into the atmosphere alternatives such as the generation of natural fertilizers replace the synthetics that predominate today. This shows the potential Next adaptation and mitigation of climate change in terms of the circular economy contribution to the SDGs: ass. Regeneration strategies of natural systems that are promoted for the biological cycle improve the resilience of our ecosystems and promote biodiversity. WASTE AND CIRCULAR ECONOMY SDG The circular economy emerges as a solution to this linear scheme based on the logic of extracting circular economy are: (1) removing waste and pollution from the di- breast; (2) keep products and materials in use for as long as possible; and (3) regenerate natural systems. The circular economy is a critical step Target 1.1: By 2025 to address the 45% of total global GHG emissions associated with reliability. production of goods and materials.54 | Target 1.2: By 2030 It has been reduced by 10% compared to 2020. To move towards this model Meta 1.3: Al 2030 with other initiatives gross has been reduced by 15% compared to 2020. strategic: Meta 1.4: Al 2030 quetado • National Roadmap to the Circular Economy 2020-2040: The Ministry- Goal 1.5: By 2040 Environment River (MMA) mine of Sustainability and Climate Change (ASCC) Route that serves as a basis to promote a transition towards the «Chile Circular» of the future through 4 axes: Innovation and territories. This has been prepared through a participatory process. with representatives of civil society and academy. 132 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 133 5.6 Building and cities Objective 2: Keep products and materials in use for as long as possible. Cities are responsible for GHG emissions from electricity consumption. 55 | Munoz tricity Meta 2.1: Al 2025 extended from the producer for textiles. energy and large amounts of materials are used for construction (2019) Cities and climate change Meta 2.2: Al 2030 has reached 30%. that generate 70% of GHG emissions 55 |and the construction industry scientific evidence. Santiago: Meta 2.3: Al 2030 Meta 2.4: Al 2040 has reached 65%. hands and the well-being of its inhabitants. and Innovation. Meta 2.5: Al 2040 In this context inclusive urban development Objective 3: Significantly increase the recovery rate of organic waste managed in the life cycle of cities nate at the municipal level (addresses natural. natural resources of the territory of Urban Development of Chile 57 | (UNDP). 57 | http://cndu.gob.cl/wp-content/ uploads / 2014/10 / L4-Politics-Nacio- About 90% of the country's population58 | live in urban areas Meta 3.1: Al 2025 are increasingly pressured by climate change and/or vermicomposters in their homes. sity that territorial planning is a tool to reduce 58 | Organization of the Nations Meta 3.2: Al 2040 the vulnerabilities to which its inhabitants are exposed and harmonize their re- United of organic waste managed at the municipal level (homes relationship with the areas of environmental value and rural territories that surround them. Sustainable 11: Cities.» [On-line]. free In them they are exposed to a series of climatic risks such as the waves available: https://www.un.org/ of heat biental and flooding of coastal settlements domestic water humans dania due to climate change in cities. What's more Objective 4: Recover sites affected by the illegal disposal of waste. of the air and the spread of emerging and recurrent communicable diseases. emerging are other factors that affect the quality of urban life. The integration of the long-term vision on the co-benefits of mitigation Meta 4.1: Al 2030 tion and adaptation to climate change is essential in the processes by sites affected by the illegal disposal of waste. territorial planning at the community level Target 4.2: By 2040 towards sustainable development. For example by sites affected by the illegal disposal of waste. human settlements directly influences the consumption of natural resources rails tion climate in the medium and long term can contribute to carbon neutrality and resilience together. Regarding Building and Cities assumes leadership and has management instruments that contribute to re- reduce the effects of climate change: • National Territorial Planning Policy (2021) tions for the development of a harmonic territory clusive in its diverse and wide geography 59 | INE (2018). Population Census of sustainable development with territorial identity. It is an instrument and Housing 2017. Santiago National Regional Statistics 60 | Collaboration Framework Agreement of the Regional Territorial Planning Plans (PROT). will establish the actions that must be fulfilled long-term objectives established in this document. on Sustainable Construction between the Ministry of Housing and Urban • Climate Change Adaptation Plan for cities (2018-2022) we are not Ministry of energy Environment Social Development and Family of Economy climate BUILDING SECTOR AND CITIES SDG • National Urban Development Policy (2014) National Urban Development and by the Ministry of Housing and Urbanis- of life of the construction and management of cities. mo Meta 1.1: Al 2025 proposing a sustainable growth of the cities of Chile. poses tional embodied carbon and operational carbon from buildings re- what's more new and existing residential go to the cities and Meta 1.2: Al 2025 to governments. The implementation of this Policy is led by the with certification and rating of sustainability or energy efficiency National Council for Urban Development and by the Ministry of Housing must publicly report their operational carbon footprint. and Urbanism. Meta 1.3: Al 2030 they will publicly report their carbon footprint (carbon incorporated) • National Sustainable Construction Strategy (2013) guidelines for the Sustainable Construction Agenda under Interministerial through the Interministerial Board of Construction- at least 10% its operational footprint with respect to the defined baseline- Sustainable Development (MICS)60 | has strongly promoted the nida incorporation of the year 2025. of sustainability in the Country Construction sector. This Strategy Goal 1.5: By 2050 It is being updated through the development of the National Plan. They must reach net zero emissions. end of Sustainable Construction by 2050 (in preparation) aligned with the ECLP. new residential construction with respect to the 2020 baseline. One of the most important lines of work of the MICS in recent years has been to promote an intersectoral work agenda to promote Objective 2: Achieve efficient new buildings and refurbish existing buildings to tar the Carbon Footprint Management of the sector public-private tea. This committee aims to identify and validate work methodologies of footprint and implement a National Monitoring System, report and see- under development with a “zero net energy” approach. rification of the Carbon Footprint of the Sector. Currently this committee Goal 2.2: By 2025 is developing the National Strategy for the Carbon Footprint of the Residential Sector in its complete cycle and definition of goals. Construction (EHCSC 2050) which will be published in November 2021 which will be aligned with the ECLP. harden the corresponding pipes to allow the subsequent installation installation of charging points for electric vehicles. Meta 2.4: Al 2030 On the other hand Policy of Sustainability and Climate Change to 2050 a long-term ministerial strategy to ensure the integration of Goal 2.6: By 2050 city and housing policies with the policies and commitments of Chile sidencial in the context of climate change October 2021.136 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 137 Meta 4.3: Al 2050 Objective 3: Develop compact and/or polycentric cities solidified equal access to services and equipment. are updated and implemented (PNOT intercommunal and communal level regulatory plans in accordance with the guidelines provided by the PROTs and that Meta 3.1: Al 2025 end of community centers. (*) Land use planning instruments at the Regional and Border levels Meta 3.2: Al 2030 with inclusion approach resources considering that soil is a scarce resource Objective 5: Integrate environmental considerations in investment at different stages of the cycle what we will understand by undeveloped land for its protection of building life ted in 50% of regions. Use of resources. Meta 3.3: Al 2030 through legal changes settlements outside urban planning and standards Target 5.1: By 2025 minimum urban requirements that consider climate risks and vulnerabilities go labels or stamps with environmental information on products and services in the definition of uses. of the construction sector. Meta 3.4: Al 2030 of Intercommunal and Communal Level Instruments (PRI minimum urban standards that consider the risks and vulnerabilities of their management climate in the definition of uses and that ensure the quality of urban life Goal 5.3: By 2025 in the time. MINVU vimentos is valued: reuse and recycling. Meta 3.5: Al 2030 urban MINVU System of Indicators and Standards of Urban Development (SIEDU). Target 5.5: By 2025 Meta 3.6: Al 2030 nitaries. Productive processes. Meta 3.7: Al 2050 strategic soil plan and social integration implemented inclusion Meta 3.8: Al 2050 urban MINVU are prioritized based on the gaps established by Goal 5.7: By 2025 System of Indicators and Standards of Urban Development (SIEDU). and costs (social and private) derived from different management alternatives Meta 3.9: Al 2050 cove neighborhood and impact on smaller companies of making the separation mandatory in origin and recovery of this waste. Objective 4: Promote integrated planning of cities Meta 5.8: Al 2030 urban governance and plan integration mechanisms. (OGUC) incorporates the requirement of labels with environmental information for construction products. Meta 5.9: Al 2025 Meta 4.1: Al 2030 of the processes and products of the construction sector in its complete cycle the definition of criteria and conditions for sustainable development and cri- and their economic value. adaptation and mitigation criteria in coordination with the strategic framework Meta 5.10: Al 2030 defined in the PROT. (OGUC) incorporates the requirement of labels with environmental information Meta 4.2: Al 2040 for construction products. of adaptation and mitigation to climate change.138 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 139 Meta 5.11: Al 2030 reuse and recycling for the manufacture of new products. Objective 7: Reduce the risk to people caused by the increase and magnitude of events Meta 5.12: Al 2030 of Construction and Demolition of the works of the MINVU (housing and urban) table (CVS). Meta 7.1: Al 2030 Meta 5.13: Al 2030 incorporating all present and future threats in the territory had recycled from other processes incorporating them into the respective climate risk analysis using projections Meta 5.14: Al 2050 climate tions and ARClim platform (the scope is approx. 100 communes so with environmental and circular economy information and demonstrate 30% of 331 that today have some valid IPT). impact reduction compared to 2030. Meta 7.2: Al 2030 Meta 5.15: Al 2050 construction that fulfill the function of prevention and mitigation in the face of environmental and social costs disaster rrence environmentally responsible. Meta 7.3: Al 2050 Meta 5.16: Al 2050 present and future threats in the territory processes. prospective analysis of climate risk and proposal of structural measures Meta 5.17: Al 2050 and non-structural for risk management. and demolition nationwide. Meta 7.4: Al 2050 suitable for your geographical situation monkeys Objective 6: Strengthen the multilevel governance of cities inclusive citizen participation Objective 8: Encourage the use of urban ecological infrastructure in cities and promote the use lization of Solutions based on Nature in attention to ecosystem services for Meta 6.1: Al 2030 mitigate and contribute to urban resilience against environmental and climatic risks that may and with intersectoral validation of coordination between Comicivyt affect communities. the Gores and Mayors Meta 6.2: Al 2030 prana tory. residents have an Ecological Infrastructure Plan implemented Meta 6.3: Al 2030 and public-private financing of infrastructure and management of urban, communal and inter-communal land. These Plans will promote the use Public for Equity and Urban Regeneration mitigation and adaptation to climate change for the metropo- different green areas and environmental value Litanes of Valparaiso Meta 6.4: Al 2050 and public-private financing of Infrastructure and Land Management Bitantes have an Ecological Infrastructure Plan prepared Public for Equity and Urban Regeneration with a Change approach that is linked to the IPT'S Climate based on Nature and ecological connectivity between different areas green and environmentally valuable. Meta 8.3: Al 2050 embody and recognize Green infrastructure strategies and solutions Nature-Based Actions as an Adaptation and Mitigation Measure to climate change.140 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 141 4. Reach the level of efficiency defined in the use of resources. Objective 9: Sustainable Urban Mobility by prioritizing and considering the needs of the various types of pedestrians and non-motorized transport modes in city planning The MOP mandate more inclusive. threatened due to climate change the challenges that climate change imposes on infrastructure an unprecedented transformation of the sector nationality and resilience to extreme weather events. Meta 9.1: Al 2030 This should be developed within a broad framework of sustainability of more than 50,000 inhabitants have Infrastructure Master Plans going to climate change mitigation and adaptation throughout the cycle Cycle-inclusive structure and have started its implementation. life of the country's public infrastructure projects. Meta 9.2: Al 2030 Mobility Plans that include provisions for the re- The main climatic threats against which the infrastructure emission reduction is exposed are changes in the rainfall pattern and increased derived from their mobile sources. in intensity and frequency of droughts Meta 9.3: Al 2050 fluvial flooding and increased intensity of coastal flooding (MOP of Chile have Cycle-inclusive Infrastructure Master Plans. Added to this is the increase in hot days and heat waves (cycle paths alluvium and increase in the average speed of the winds (waterspouts). shared use These events will have a direct impact on the country's infrastructure, affecting intermodal parking). to road works Meta 9.4: Al 2050 rainwater drainage urban mobile phones of 30% (lower than the base year 2018) derived from the implementa- rainy Mention of Mobility Plans mentioned in goal 9.2 in collaboration and implementation of critical infrastructure for the supply of goods ration with MINVU and essential services of the country events to ensure appropriate stock and avoid supply breaks. This sector has the following management instruments in terms of of climate change: 5.7 Infrastructure • Adaptation and Mitigation Plan for Infrastructure Services In Chile, public infrastructure is executed by the Ministry of Works 61 | Decree with Force of Law 850 ra to Climate Change (2017-2022) public building Coordinated and Systematized public fiscal and the coordinating body of the execution plans of adapting to climate change in a framework of resilience and sustainability. works carried out by the Services that constitute it. 61 | Law 18 of 1960. phases of the life cycle of projects. for that object zar in the provision and management of infrastructure works and services for the co- 62 | https://www.mop.cl/acercadel- nectividad and the optimal use of water resources; ensuring the provi- aspx as an objective to adapt the country's infrastructure to the challenges of the sion and care of water resources and the environment in economic development of life and equal opportunities for people» 62 |. in order to fulfill • Roadmap for a Circular Chile by 2040 (2021) with his mission Ministry of the Environment in conjunction with other public institutions 1. Promote the economic development of the country through infrastructure- seeks to guide and evaluate the level of progress in the transition towards an Eco- ture with an integrating territorial vision. Circular economy of which MOP is a key player. 2. Promote social and cultural development through infrastructure improving people's quality of life. In terms of infrastructure, the commitments of the Ministry of Public Works Public policies addressed in the carbon budgets address the areas in which 3. Contribute to the sustainable management of the environment water and ecosystems. matic. It is possible to assume the commitment of having a carbon stock for 142 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 143 the sector by 2050 and advance in the proposed reductions to the extent that have a baseline Objective 2: Advance in a circular economy approach in building and infrastructure with the support of the Ministry of Environment will advance in the definition of the Using Life Cycle Assessment baseline of the construction that allow defining the reduction actions and prioritize the use of recycled materials of Greenhouse Gas emissions for your future mitigation plan technique required for the works. and compliance with the sectoral reduction goals. In its Adaptation component Adaptation to climate change for the infrastructure sector per year public structure 2023 dance with the long-term objectives established in this document. Target 2.2: By 2030 further public road for water will contemplate to the population and territory (through fluvial works) and/or attend to infrastructure implements sustainable waste management plans priority the demands associated with urban and rural human consumption area of influence. Target 2.4: By 2050 LCA in 50% of infrastructure initiatives by 2050. Meta 2.5: Al 2050 infrastructure performs a sustainable management of Construction Waste Next contribution to the SDGs: INFRASTRUCTURE SECTOR SDG Objective 1: Promote the integration and participation of vulnerable groups (gender approach indigenous munitions Meta 3.1: Al 2030 Meta 1.1: Al 2030 and low-carbon buildings (with LCA approach) and egg management of vulnerable groups in infrastructure and building planning processes. carbon reduction in at least 20% of infrastructure initiatives cation*. and buildings. Meta 1.2: Al 2030 nerable in participatory processes. Target 3.2: By 2050 Meta 1.3: Al 2050 consider analysis of vulnerable groups (*) Annual inclusion will be measured (**) The measurement will be carried out annually from 2024 onwards to have the conceptual framework.144 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 145 5.8. transport Objective 4: Advance in the development of a multisector infrastructure planning system that incorporates the determining factors of the territory with adequate governance with a public-private articulation structure of the country (multimodal connectivity (terrestrial drinking water supply current and future same multisectoral integration (cities "intelligent mobility" leading to more efficient and synergistic travel patterns regional and communal Meta 4.1: Al 2030 so many a governance mechanism that allows articulating the parties related more sustainable development two with the provision of infrastructure and public construction that requires and fossil fuels. the country to deal with climate change tion as mitigation (academy In the vision of the sector among others). totality of the human being Meta 4.2: Al 2050 multisectoral climate finance in infrastructure planning processes- future generations. To reach this end tructure and ministerial public construction. contribute continuously to the reduction of environmental pollution to the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions and reduce local pollutants changing weather. Mobility must be economically sustainable Objective 5: Advance in the development of a risk monitoring system facilitating the access of people to their places of destination and the supply silence. Namely sale of goods and services case vacation Meta 5.1: Al 2030 principles should also consider inclusion and gender approaches structure and participation Meta 5.2: Al 2050 tenables structure and built buildings to opportunities from the country. GHG emissions from the sector are generated by burning fuels fossils in the operation of air transport rivers kt CO 2eq fundamentally due to the growth of the national automotive park driven by urban and demographic expansion the highest purchasing power Objective 6: Promote the development of sustainable buildings and infrastructure road in the country. further territorial aspects and solutions based on nature (green and hybrid) as an alternative local air pollutants (particulate matter and gases pre- or complement to gray infrastructure. cursors) that directly impact the health of the inhabitants. To reduce GHG emissions from mobile sources Meta 6.1: Al 2030 by type of work and Implement I project that integrate these solutions. continuous and progressive reduction of emissions until reaching a rate of 0 Meta 6.2: Al 2050 2eq ture and public buildings with solutions based on nature.63 | direct GHG emissions with respect to those reported for the year 2018 (INGEI) from the use of fuels in the transport sector. This percentage will be subject to the refinement of the projections (SNP) and the development 63 | The annex to Official Letter No. 281 of 27 committed to each objective of the development of particular goals for each region and city. October 2021 Public details the goals by Department 146 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 147 Climate change mitigation strategies for the sector depend on • National Sustainable Mobility Strategy give a management the: optimization of land use patterns and planning the ocu- sectoral pation of the territory on the research of energy; the development of electrical infrastructure networks enabling • National Urban Mobility Program for Adaptation and Mitigation- for the electromobility model (MINENERGIA) tion to Climate Change spaces for load centers and electro-terminals; the development systematize of incentives and the promotion of new technologies (MINECON) sustainable viability roads and interurban infrastructure such as highways Promote and monitor their Sustainable Mobility Plans. logistics platforms (MOP) conceived from a sustainability approach; the execution of urban road infrastructure (MINVU-SERVIU) Complaints filed in different State bodies and multiple levels of the In a complementary way government administration (national tions highlights the role of the Ministry of Transport and Telecommunications (MTT) whose powers allow it to act in matters of planning and Mobility policies (or Transportation Master Plans public carriage the promotion of public transport improvements operational aspects of the sector. complemented with the Investment Plans in Mobility Infrastructure and Public space that are developed at the municipal level and in alliance with MINVU; Approximately half of the emissions from mobile sources come from the Electromobility Promotion Program; the Renewal Program nen of displacements that occur in the urban area travel demand is mainly explained by the location of households employment centers logistics distribution. The other half of the emissions comes from the disintegration of mobility. vacancies generated in the interurban area interaction of cities with their areas of influence Transportation as a dependent variable of activity systems interprovincial and interregional and freight movements requires designing and applying holistic and multisectoral approaches that allow raw materials and waste transport allow approaching the solution considering three fundamental strategies: (1) internal (cities) Avoid (reduce trips and manage demand) border). more sustainable) clean). The success of these measures depends on the coordination and correspondence To move towards sustainable mobility, strategies are required reliability of multiple public and private actors that allow to continue granting connectivity and access to people and goods education-based mobility but with a significant effort to reduce the use and dependence on the use environmental science. of fossil fuels. In the urban area that increase the use of energy-efficient modal alternatives and lower GHG emissions per person or good transported active: non-motorized transport 64 | For the purpose of this document issuance. 64 | In the intercity area the concept of mobility and cleaner energies will be used active dad of co-benefits in the area of people between the functional areas of cities and their urban centers. Health. Regarding the load technology with intermodal transfer strategies Greater efficiency in moving goods. Within the institutional sphere Key instruments that will guide sectoral action on mitigation and adaptation to climate change rolled to 2022:148 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 149 Next of long-term and its contribution to the SDGs: Objective 2: Incorporate in the formulation processes of the instruments of land-use rial and urban planning integrated considering mobility and transportation components compact [Strategy 1: Avoid] SECTOR TRANSPORTES ODS Objective 1: Guide decisions regarding mobility and urban and territorial development of prioritizing the most sustainable and efficient modes of displacement, both urban and sustainable intercity in the Strategic Environmental Assessment of the IPT and PROT banos being social and quality of life social mobility. [Strategy 1: Avoid] Road Capacity Studies. Meta 1.1: Al 2021 the Carbon Footprint of Rail Transport. Objective 3: Promote initiatives to strengthen public transport and modes of transport Target 1.2: By 2023 Mention of sustainable mobility in territorial planning in the formulation of infrastructure and land use plans. rritorial. Meta 3.1: Al 2025 Meta 1.3: Al 2025 main cities of the country (over 50 thousand inhabitants) the Master Plans and collaborative initiatives to promote low or zero emission mobility of Cyclo-inclusive Infrastructure and with the MOP interurban networks that allow between the national government mitan connect these cities with nearby towns and other cities civil society that belong to its functional area of influence. Meta 1.4: Al 2025 ble addressed to police officers in charge of traffic Transit Directions and Planning cation three others. Transition in 23 intermediate cities with less than 80,000 inhabitants Meta 1.5: Al 2030 They draft Territorial Planning Instruments and/or develop the emission reduction plan. construction of urban and interurban road infrastructure works Meta 3.3: Al 2030 objectives of sustainable mobility and promote a territorial planning Modal Exchange Terms rial that helps improve accessibility and Great Conception Travel. Santiago updated. Meta 1.6: Al 2030 progressively powered by fossil fuels in all regions 2026 base 2017. Target 1.7: By 2030 and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation) impulsado por la Orga- Meta 3.5: Al 2030 Organization of International Civil Aviation (ICAO) emissions compensation through the purchase and cancellation of and barriers to pedestrian mode. emissions units by local operators. Target 3.6: By 2030 Meta 1.8: Al 2040 State riles will be carbon neutral. of security Completing the initiatives through the Mobility Infrastructure Plans and Public Space developed at the community level.150 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 151 Meta 3.7: Al 2040 Mobility Teachers in the 35 cities with more than 80,000 inhabitants conceived under a sustainable mobility approach and with specific goals reduction of emissions and have developed and updated Plans in terms of coverage of Traffic Management in 25 intermediate cities with less than 80,000 ha- tegy 3: Improve] bitantes specific emissions reduction. Meta 3.8: Al 2040 of Modal Exchange Meta 5.1: Al 2030 Great Conception (2) dinner and dissemination of mobility information have developed the new Plans in the Metropolitan Areas of Iqui- and digital that-High Hospice (5) darized and continuous respectively. and open platforms for the entire mobility ecosystem. Meta 3.9: Al 2050 Meta 5.2: Al 2030 Mobility Masters in 38 cities with more than 80,000 inhabitants mobility policy for users and operators conceived under a sustainable mobility approach and with specific goals digital mation of mobility management reduction of emissions and have developed and updated Plans of processes and through the application of predictive systems of Traffic Management in 28 intermediate cities with less than 80,000 ha- from Mobility Observatories, whether public or private. bitantes Meta 5.3: Al 2030 specific emissions reduction. go out in public space Meta 3.10: Al 2050 that facilitate the inclusion and development of sustainable modes ns of Modal Exchange in the 9 Metropolitan Areas potentially the extension of coverage of signalized intersections for people enacted to date. visually impaired. Meta 5.4: Al 2030 information-based mobility structure Objective 4: Strengthen planning integration urban information services for citizens compared to individual transport. [Strategy 2: Change] jogging their channels. Goals 5.5: By 2050 Meta 4.1: Al 2030 structure of Public Transport in 6 potential Metropolitan Areas and two development of new management models under the concept of mobility as mono-communal cities (Arica and Valdivia). service Meta 4.2: Al 2030 all the metropolitan areas potentially existing to date: Iqui- enabling. that - High Hospice Machali; The Serene Coquimbo; Valparaiso. co-private participatory Meta 4.3: Al 2040 of Public Transport Infrastructure in 9 Metropolitan Areas. sustainable and appropriate to the different territorial realities. Meta 4.4: Al 2050 of Public Transport Infrastructure in the 10 Metropolitan Areas of the main cities potentially existing to date and additionally the city of Anto- and the efficiency of the road infrastructure fagasta. traffic lights to traffic control centers.152 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 153 Objective 6: Increase the use of clean technologies (low or zero carbon emissions) in the trans- urban public size urban and intercity. [Strategy 3: Improve] According to the World Health Organization (WHO) Change 66 | WHO (1946) Preamble to the Meta 6.1: Al 2030 clean in Urban Logistics vility and green hydrogen tion and information Holland and H2 /Chile for Green Hydrogen. emerging diseases Meta 6.2: Al 2030 transport at the urban level (MTT): flows and speeds enabling nutrition and forced displacement. Thus the calculation of annual estimates of emissions from mobile sources is an important responsibility in terms of climate change: on the one hand that performs MMA for the 28 main cities of Chile ner of monitoring pollutants in the urban environment (MRV). 65 | country will face Meta 6.3: Al 2030 reconversion of vehicles to low-emission technologies to the processes of technological reconversion. social Meta 6.4: Al 2040 100% based on zero emission technologies Meta 6.5: Al 2040 and collective taxis to a zero-emissions model. public policies consider impacts on health and physical well-being Meta 6.6: Al 2050 to 58% of the vehicle fleet mercials. The main climatic threats for the sector are the increase in Meta 6.7: Al 2050 of freight vehicles based on zero emission vehicles. intensity of precipitation matics morbidity and mortality due to changes in temperature and extreme events climatic Objective 7: Incorporate in decisions and planning an active and effective participation of the dengue fever) ) citizenship allergic diseases multilevel articulation mosférica [Strategies 1 others. As well to the climate crisis Meta 7.1: Al 2025 non-profit organizations of civil society and accompany the modal shift towards low or zero emission mobility encouraging the active and effective participation of citizens. regulation of biogas control in landfills (4 Meta 7.2: Al 2030 and multi-state in the development of all health plan instruments that are intensive in energy use; and in applicable regulations Mobility and transportation fication definitive signs of projects and their processes of execution of works. controlled substances and products Meta 7.3: Al 2030 level for sustainable mobility them to strengthen regionalization. The main body in charge of the sector is the Ministry of Health. Meta 7.4: Al 2050 who will lead the development of mitigation and adaptation plans for the sector centralized for mobility in accordance with the Climate Change Framework Law Project. and democratic Health will contribute to the fulfillment of commitments to mitigate the NDC at the national level. In its Adaptation component will update the climate change adaptation plan for the health sector to the year 2022. This plan will establish the actions that must be fulfilled Goal 3: Include the health implications of mitigation and adaptation measures in dance with the long-term objectives established in this document. economic and fiscal policies (since their design) in the different sectors "health" in all policies. Next contribution to the SDGs: Meta 3.1: Al 2024 in 100% of the Discharge Hospital Establishments Complexity Meta 3.2: Al 2025 HEALTH SECTOR SDG sanitary safe mo of water from new sources such as the harvest rainwater and fog catchers; and prepare technically at the levels Objective 1: Strengthen national knowledge and evidence regarding regional variables for health control of the implementation of such alternatives. environmental issues linked to climate change and how these might affect native health and well-being. of people. Target 3.3: By 2025 consumption of fossil fuels and firewood) and technologies (equipment) the generation of Greenhouse Gases in Hospital establishments Meta 1.1: Al 2025 High thalares prospective monitoring zones considering local environmental conditions of health linked to climate change. Meta 3.4: Al 2025 Meta 1.2: Al 2025 national embodied carbon and operational carbon of buildings regional risk matrices have been created considering the risks to health new and existing health associated with climate change through the application of a tool Meta 3.5: Al 2030 methodology specially designed for this purpose. publicly its carbon footprint (embodied carbon and operational carbon) Meta 1.3: Al 2025 tional). real-time geographic data) of the different population groups Meta 3.6: Al 2030 vulnerable to heat waves. with sanitary authorization will comply with the regulation on control of biogas. Objective 2: Educate and its impacts on the health and well-being of the population raise awareness in communities and promote prevention measures the expected impacts of climate change on health. Target 3.8: By 2030 sanitation on biogas management. Meta 3.9: Al 2030 Meta 2.1: Al 2024 safe and responsible consumption of water in homes. cid limits on carbon emissions for health buildings. Meta 2.2: Al 2025 case of water your communities and promoting self-care measures informative sessions and participatory education. to landfills for the disposal of household solid waste Meta 2.3: Al 2030 in the key teams of the health sector more complex levels due to climate change.156 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 157 In this context Objective 4: Surveillance and monitor the effects on people's health and well-being of the events cli- build new capacities to adapt and face the effects with resilience extreme matics. of climate change de GEI del sector. Meta 4.1: Al 2023 with health risk due to decreased access to water for consumption through the Undersecretary of Tourism and manage before the competent institution to correct the public problem and coordination of the parties that make up the sector health in the identified population. Ministry of Tourism (Sernatur) executing public of plans and programs based on the National Strategy Meta 4.2: Al 2025 tourism nent and updated according to the identification of zonal indicators specialization in the industry. relevant to climate change. Meta 4.3: Al 2025 nification of unusual findings variables of importance in public health that are associated with climate change. Adaptation to Climate Change in the Tourism Sector secretary of tourism has 21 measures that seek to install capacities and generate conditions enablers for the implementation of measures to adapt and face current and future effects of climate change and sustainability of the sector by 2024. Its update will establish the actions 5.10 Tourism that the sector must comply with in accordance with the long-term objectives established in the ECLP. Variation in temperatures and precipitation and the occurrence of extreme weather events of the sector in addition to the increased risk of extreme events with which the tourism sector must implement in coordination with the different you risk that they entail. Those impacts have an unequal distribution of gains involved. in the industry natural marriage and small businesses flexible. This shows that the adaptability of the industry SDG TOURISM SECTOR tria will be essential to ensure the sustainability and growth of the sector. On the other hand because will affect the conditions for activities related to snow in the natural y of the territories. winter season. Regarding extreme weather events of tidal and storm events will affect the coastline Meta 1.1: Al 2030 coastal zion at the national level for the development of prioritized tourist experiences ment of the conditions that favor the occurrence of forest fires (nature like high temperatures sports and gastronomy) aimed at sustainable and resilient development tourism monium associated with the natural landscape and ecosystems present in the climate change of local and indigenous communities. different territories economic condition of the sector. As a challenge, progress must be made in the analysis Goal 1.2: By 2030 climate risk of heritage and tourist attractions related to strategic guidelines) in at least 3 lines of priority experiences loss of terrestrial biodiversity sweet in lakes extreme hydroclimates. issues of climate change and the recognition of the importance of 67 | World Economic Forum (2007). local and indigenous communities. Complementarily Davos Declaration business climate tico and tourism. Davos GHG emission mitigation measures ration_of_Davos._Change_Climate- by Davos67 | and which is reflected in its long-term goals. co_y_Turismo.pdf (ucipfg.com)158 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 159 Meta 1.3: Al 2050 development of all tourist experiences (nature tourism and others to be defined according to sector priorities) aimed at development to avoid saturation. sustainable and resilient to Climate Change of local communities Meta 3.5: Al 2030 and indigenous. tico Meta 1.4: Al 2050 of route or strategic guidelines) in at least 7 lines of experiences Goal 3.6: By 2050 prioritized (rural tourism tourism according to sector priorities). Meta 3.7: Al 2050 lidados) most vulnerable to climate change Tourist Saturation (IST) and will implement actions to avoid the saturation. Objective 2: Strengthen the institutionality and governance of the tourism sector threads of climate change public-private partnership. tico of action. Meta 2.1: Al 2030 and Regional Governments to implement destination management plans to avoid saturation in each of the dimensions: infrastructure and environment tourism in at least 30% of prioritized tourist destinations. environment Meta 2.2: Al 2030 co-private of the ZOITs declared by 2028 of sustainability and climate change. Objective 4: Increase the resilience of tourist destinations against the impacts of climate change. Meta 2.3: Al 2050 and Regional Governments to implement destination management plans tourism in at least 60% of prioritized tourist destinations. Meta 4.1: Al 2030 Meta 2.4: Al 2050 public-private of the ZOITs declared by 2048 Meta 4.2: Al 2050 more about sustainability and climate change. of the Infrastructure Master Plan for Tourism that have a focus adaptation to climate change. Objective 3: Promote sustainable management that is resilient to climate change in the territories associated linked to tourist destinations and generation of local capacities. efficiency in energy and water consumption and use of renewable energy sources mind in the transport and accommodation sector. Meta 3.1: Al 2030 tourist destinations have a Tourism Development Plan Meta 5.1: Al 2030 and in operation. Meta 5.2: Al 2030 Goal 3.2: By 2030, have an operational mechanism that can be upgraded for Energy. the identification of the most vulnerable tourist destinations to change quality in tourist transport. matic. Target 5.3: By 2050 Goal 3.3: By 2030 have a system for visualizing Satu- metrics ration of Tourist Destinations* that supports decision-making for the sus- tourist viability of the destination.160 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 161 5.11. Coastal Edge68 | The impacts derived from these events affect human settlements natural systems that are made there. These threats are intensified by those attribu- To increase adaptability 68 | In this document we will use the term «Coastal edge» con- of the coastline against climate change train the territorial faculties sustainable strategic fication of the Ministry of National Defense of the national territory specified in DFL 340 of 1960 and in management of existing resources. All this the National Policy for the Use of the Bor- and constant protection of the maritime habitat Coastal (PNUBC). However will upgrade to "Coastal Zone" Climate change is already having a major impact on infrastructure. enacted the Framework Law of Change of vital importance the application of an integrated approach to risk ture present on the coastline. In particular Climate. ga the ability to take into account all types of threats is suffering the effects of this phenomenon more is included the generation of knowledge and constant training port closures due to tidal waves and storms that allows adaptation to possible future impacts for the parts of the logistics chain. both for ports coastal edge is affected by estuarine dynamics and those of the surrounding basins. present infrastructure, it is vital to adapt the facilities to minimize tientals that transport fresh water and sediments creepage and coastal erosion body and its ecosystems early warning. in a coordinated way in planning. The ecosystems coastline will be threatened primarily by increased in- long-term objectives and goals proposed for the coastline sector- stress and frequency of extreme events fluvial winds (waterspouts). further coastal tions to high return periods In the process of designing and implementing adaptation solutions two of century that aim to meet the goals and objectives of this Strategy flood elevation relevance for the sector the generation and improvement of scientific information from sea basic; the integration of said information and data from different institutions tion for the integrated management of the coastal edge; the broad participation of mid-century Regional Governments of sea level including the private sector and organized civil society; The education although these increase towards the end of the century. Finally lization and dissemination of aspects related to climate risk on the coastline erosion on the beaches located between Arica and the Chacao Channel the protection It will work with average setbacks of between 3 and 25 m. projections for purposes of coastal marine systems century (2081-2100) indicate that the rise in sea level will be of the order from 0 The administration of the coastline is in charge of the Ministry of Defense of coastal settlements National fishing working on its climate change adaptation plan. for management about the infrastructure of the coastal edge with cultural and natural heritage. Final Use of the Coastal Border of the Republic's coastline (Ministry of Defense National With respect to sea level rise iii) National Oceanic Policy (MINREL our country is permanently affected by vertical deformations associated Port and Coastal to 2020 (MOP linked to tectonic activity guide (MMA or immediate tailors and National Strategic Plan 2020-2030 (ONEMI significant to those attributed to the rise in mean sea level due to and Public Safety do to climate change. As a complement to this Strategy, it is important Reconstruction the study of both phenomena together For the sector, coordination with other sectoral plans is relevant. ground deformation. and its updates tico in biodiversity and the Plan for adaptation and mitigation of services tions162 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 163 infrastructure to climate change Goal 1.7: Contribute to the initiatives being carried out by the Ministry related provisions of Science in territorial ordering instruments» Climate Change Observatory (OCC) and the implementation of the System enviroment Integrated Observation System for the Chilean Ocean (SIOOC) and Urbanism and Undersecretary of Regional and Administrative Development. (*) The concepts of critical and strategic infrastructure are included, such as The 2020 NDC draft a plan for adaptation to climate change for the Coastal Border per year 2022. This plan will establish the actions that must be fulfilled dance with the long-term objectives established in this document. Objective 2: Promote instances of inclusive participation in the development of instruments land use planning associated with the coastline. Next contribution to the SDGs: Target 2.1: By 2025 training aimed at the personnel of the organizations that participate in the preparation of Territorial Planning Instruments cough of climate change on the coastline coastal natural spaces and risk management associated with these COASTAL EDGE SECTOR SDG through different instances such as workshops Objective 1: Increase and make available the information and studies of the coastline and the development of tech- Goal 2.2: Promote the participation of the various actors of society ocean nology. civil in the different stages of the development of the future Zoning of the Coastal Border (ZBC) raising awareness about the importance of the role of coastal natural spaces Meta 1.1: Al 2025 and associated risk management. geographical background and systematized attributes of all the maritime and aquaculture concessions located on the Coastal Edge. Meta 1.2: Al 2025 of the information of maritime concessions and other affectations of free of the promotion of a safe and resilient occupation of the Coastal Edge. access to citizenship. Meta 1.3: Al 2030 forecasts that allow identifying concentration of activities territorial and risk analysis for critical and strategic infrastructure* tions related to disaster risk management. as well Meta 3.2: Al 2025 coastal. but (CCMM) Goal 1.4: Integrate the different data platforms that exist at the of maritime concessions that contribute to risk reduction in support of studies related to climate change. of disasters and adaptation to climate change Meta 1.5: Al 2030 coastal and river protection systematically the national oceanographic scientific activities. weighting criteria will materialize in the option of being able to access Meta 1.6: Al 2050 to reduced marine concession of systemic observation in aspects of oceanography with other applications that do not have preference criteria in terms of ciology. to disaster risk management Law No. 20,249 and its Regulations.164 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 165 In this context Goal 4: Build resilience through policies and instruments that promote protection conservation and sustainable use of the Chilean sea protection of ecosystem services diversity and ecosystem services of the country as a source of its own welfare Meta 4.1: Al 2025 of the Coastal Edge tions related to the care of areas under official protection located to meet the needs of future generations. on the coastline. Institutional level to generate the policies sity Other instruments in the field of biodiversity that stand out • Climate Change Adaptation Plan for the Biodiversity Sector (2014) aims to strengthen the country's capacity to deal with developments climatic changes and the pressure they exert on goods and services of ecosystems 5.12 Biodiversity ity and favor its adaptation to climate change. From the objective In general, 50 measures are established under four specific objectives that aim at biodiversity research and capacity building Biodiversity at the national level is very varied cities degree of endemism ration of biodiversity objectives in planning instruments deliver a myriad of ecosystem services that maintain and enhance territory and the strengthening of the National System of Protected Areas the well-being of people through the implementation of adaptation measures at the ecosystem level. cost themes and species. It is planned to start updating this Plan in the among others. However next months. negative on biodiversity that determine the composition • Law 21,202 on the Protection of Urban Wetlands (2020) ecosystems and the species that compose them for the specific purpose of regulating wetland ecosystems changes in the ecosystem services they provide within urban areas (wetlands wholly or partially within the boundary) the collapse of ecosystems and the extinction of some species urban te) and introduce into national legislation next detriment in ecosystem services. concept of urban wetlands ecosystems have for cities Climate risk analyzes for species foresee a decrease the recreaction in current distribution areas among others; and the strong threats under which they find themselves. coast towards the mountains and a movement towards the poles north south themes tion. The central-southern zone of the country is the one that presents the greatest risk to In terms of biodiversity, it will contribute to the fulfillment of the commitments future variations in climate misuse in the adaptation and integration components of the NDC of flora and fauna to persist in areas where we currently recognize are established as: i) update of the Biodiversity Adaptation Plan their distribution and presence. to 2022 and 2027; ii) forest commitments themes and vii) oceans. On the other hand land use or water cycle disruption in this way the direct effects of climate change on biodiversity dad.166 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 167 Next contribution to the SDGs: of the country created will have management plans designed and in implemen- mentation community bonding and threat control; considering in your process of design Target 2.3: By 2030 BIODIVERSITY SDG current surface of official protection of terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems continental Objective 1: Contribute to the recovery and conservation of the diversity of living organisms of State Protected Areas that are part of the country's ecosystems ified as climatic refuges for biodiversity; through areas nentals and oceanic islands. Protected Areas (PA) and other effective conservation measures (OMEC) based on give in areas 30% of the planet's land and oceans by 2030. Meta 1.1: Al 2025 of necessary modifications to the maritime management instruments for Target 2.4: By 2030, 100% of the public protected areas of the System ma National Protected Areas of the State the protection of marine mammals in areas of relevance for the conservation continental serving. effective mentation Meta 1.2: Al 2030 to climate change (subject to implementation of the SBAP).* threatened by 2020 will have Recovery Plans (*) Subject to implementation of the SBAP. and Species Management officialized and in implementation*. Meta 1.3: Al 2030 control and/or eradication of terrestrial Invasive Alien Species (IAS) Goal 3: Promote landscape-scale restoration to restore native biodiversity and hydrobiological the functionality and structure of the different types of ecosystems (terrestrial Meta 1.4: Al 2050 inland waters tation among others) and the provision of ecosystem goods and services at least and communities in the face of climate change and other factors of degradation. born to 2020*. Meta 1.5: Al 2050 control and / or eradication of terrestrial and hydrobiological ISS of IAS prioritized by 2040. ration Meta 1.6: Al 2050 in the year 2020 classified as threatened are those that are critically endangered endangered or vulnerable). monitoring and reporting of the progress of the restoration processes (Subject SBAP implementation). (*) Goals established considering that Biodiversity Service and Protected Areas (SBAP) is not yet implemented. Objective 4: Provide and mobilize financial resources to close the gap in contract financing. Preservation and restoration of biodiversity in the context of climate change Objective 2: Promote the protection of ecosystems of importance for biodiversity to au- Chile's international and national commitments in the matter enhance their representativeness and restoration. both public and private financing mechanisms. Target 2.1: By 2030 protected areas (AMPs) and other effective conservation measures (OMEC) based on the context of climate change in areas marine regions underrepresented in the national Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) for the mobilization of financing. This strategy will be Chilean; established mainly along the coast and in identified areas in conjunction with the Ministry of Finance*. classified as climatic refuges for biodiversity. The above framework based on science and considering criteria to face the effects adverse effects of climate change. 168 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 169 Meta 4.2: Al 2030 funding for biodiversity established in the national wetland strategy nal for the mobilization of financing. assessment of the capacity to adapt or mitigate climate change of this type of ecosystem. Meta 4.3: Al 2050 for biodiversity established in the national strategy for Target 5.11: By 2030 restoration and wise use of wetlands to enhance co-benefits pro- the mobilization of financing. ** seen by wetlands (*) A progressive reduction of the gap will be sought. This will be updated every in five pilot sites in public or private protected areas of the country. five years. Meta 5.12: Al 2030 between 20,000 and 25,000 hectares of wetlands throughout the territory (**) The gap to be considered will be the most up-to-date will perform a regular calculation every 5 years. territorial planning instruments. Meta 5.13: Al 2050 between 75,000 and 100,000 hectares of wetlands throughout the territory national thorium territorial planning instruments. Objective 5: Strengthen the incorporation of biodiversity objectives and the use of solutions based on Target 5.14: By 2050, maintain the balance of GHG emissions from wetlands in nature (NbS) in policies dales territorial management and planning instruments. restoration of degraded or lost wetland surfaces. Goal 5.1: By 2022, a standard and planning methodology will have been defined. Updates (every 5 years) of the national inventory of wetlands Objective 6: Avoid and evaluation of land use change in wetlands. sustainable production and consumption of natural resources. Goal 5.2: By 2025 the information needs will have been met and financing to include wetland emissions and removals Meta 6.1: Al 2022 that remain as such in the national GHG inventory. And he will have identified mos for the sustainability of urban wetlands to be implemented by the tified the funding source to obtain the required information. municipalities of the country. (MINAGRI-MMA). Meta 6.2: Al 2025 Goal 5.3: By 2025 Chile will have a regulation that promotes the con- promote and ensure the protection of biodiversity within the framework of conservation and rational use of peatlands. environmental offsets. Meta 5.4: Al 2025 Meta 6.3: Al 2025 two between 10,000 and 15,000 hectares of wetlands throughout the territory vation and rational use of wetlands for the construction sectors national agriculture and forestry and extraction of aggregates and minerals. territorial planning instruments. Meta 6.4: Al 2025 Meta 5.5: Al 2025 with wetland management plans nature-based solutions in different sectors and areas of integration rationale of these ecosystems. tion Meta 6.5: Al 2030 servation of Nature. and between 5% and 10% of the country's bays will be regulated by Standards Meta 5.6: Al 2025 Secondary Environmental Quality in prioritized aquatic ecosystems. ration and NbS that considers socio-ecological aspects and climate risk Meta 6.6: Al 2030 matic established a certification system for biodiversity and ecosystem services and monitor them. and a payment mechanism for ecosystem services Target 5.7: By 2025 protect at least 20 coastal wetlands as new recognition and promotion of good production practices in the sectors protected areas. agents with the greatest influence on biodiversity. Meta 5.8: Al 2025 Goal 6.7: By 2030 there will be a state of full exploitation at least other types of wetlands 60% of the main Chilean fisheries. Target 5.9: By 2030, the NbS instructions will have been implemented in at least us 50% of the prioritized sectors by 2025170 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 171 5.13 Water Resources for Energy; Ministry of Science Ministry of Defence The challenge posed requires an institutional framework that allows strengthening In Chile, three fundamental challenges are recognized for the management of CER governance 70 | First report National Table water resources: Water Security of the water related drick Chile to 2020 of ecosystems and human activities adaptation of the country. In consecuense water supply for human consumption for ecosystems and strategic productive activities water and sanitation infrastructure required at the national level. in addition ensure strategic planning of basins to maintain a balance with respect to the needs and problems of water scarcity between conservation and other uses of the resource care for health of ecosystems is a country challenge by 2050. that risk water security. The Ministry of Public Works formalizes its commitment to action in favor In the last 30 years do steadily and increasingly 50% in the north-central macrozones. Temperature rises and public isotherms zero produce premature thaws and liquid precipitation on the reserve and creates the new Ministry of Public Works and Water Resources nival In the mountain range during the last decade. It has also been detected that the patterns of preci- Panel of Experts of a technical nature. This decision opens an opportunity pitation follow these same trends early tion of climate change in the effects of a megadrought that has climate change scenarios. affected a large part of the country. Product of climate change would exist an extension of the hyper arid zone at Approximately 10% of the continental surface (70,000 km2) will increase as the strategic management of risk and vulnerability information in its aridity category. Regarding the uses of water by water resources corresponds to agricultural use urban and rural drinking regional differences in the relative demands of these activities. In view of Among the main management instruments of the sector are: these backgrounds process and equitable use of the resource • Changes in the legal and institutional framework proposed with the creation and quality control (regulation and monitoring). of the New Public Institutionality of Water Resources. The inherent transversality of water resources permeates governance of water in Chile. There are more than 40 organizations and institutions at the • Plan against drought (2021) with varying degrees of interference in water management. Updating of water and improving the efficiency of its use at of Public Works (MOP) Superintendence of Sanitary Services (SISS) of the water resources sector in the ECLP. The strategic nature of the MOP in this matter translates into a coordinating role for the consolidation of a • National Adaptation Plan to Climate Change for Resources 71 | Available at: https://www.gob. joint vision Water (PANCC RH) 72 | cl / plansequia / tions that have attributions water resources (MMA); Ministry of Agriculture (MINAGRI); Ministry of Mining; Ministry • Strategic Water Management Plans (PEGH) for each of the 101 will be published in 2022 administrative basins defined in Chile 73 | Available at: https://www.mop. citizen passion cl/MesaAgua/index.html and subnational (regions and communes of Chile) and management from the territories WATER RESOURCES SECTOR SDG thoriums. 74 | Specific actions are detailed in section 5.2.2 Areas Objective 1: Promote water security of greater urgency in action • Clean Production Agreements Program (APL-Blue Certificate) for the guidance of the provision of water for ecosystems and adaptation climate Contribution in Adaptation N ° 7 (A7) Meta 1.1: Al 2025 P. 43. NDC_Chile_2020_Spanish-1. validated and published by the General Directorate of Waters or any institution pdf (mma.gob.cl) • Chile Footprint Program tification for projects that encourage the improvement of availability access in nature or innovative technologies. Target 1.2: Review and monitoring of targets for the Development Objective Sustainable 6 (SDG6) • Health Sector Agenda 2030 term of the SISS and aims to implement the challenges of the Sector the indicators for SDG6 Sanitary in Chile through 12 projects. with the custodian agencies and those national agencies re- lift in the process. This within the framework of the attributions and priorities that the General Directorate of Waters has. To be considered for the future water finance and an integrated water information system issued of technical roundtables within the framework of the National Water Roundtable (MNA).73 | Objective 2: Encourage the integrated management of hydrographic basins aiming at the search The NDC establishes water security as one of eight key criteria for innovative solutions that prospectively investigate the gap between supply and demand to consider in Chile's climate commitments and presents water commitments. specific in its Adaptation Component tation to Climate Change for Water Resources and the development and actualization Goal 2.1: Elaborate Implementation of strategic basin management plans for the 101 basins Water Management Costs from the country. It also points out that the information and mechanisms have a Strategic Water Management Plan. management of the country regarding the impacts of climate change on natural resources Goal 2.2: Carry out studies that analyze the implementation of solutions water based on nature (NbS) as an alternative for water management in With respect to the afforestation commitments presented in the compo- main watersheds of the country. NDC Integration Group in areas where it contributes to the conservation and protection of soils medales NDC commitment to reduce emissions from the forestry sector that the adaptive management of vegetation resources to change will be considered Target 2.4: By 2030 climate Meta 2.5: Al 2050 assess the robustness of adaptation measures to climate change short Next Contribution to the SDGs: Finance in all PEGH update processes. 174 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 175 Objective 3: Promote research ration of knowledge basins Goal 4.1: Support the management of the executive to approve the bill that creates the Undersecretary of Water Resources in the Ministry of Works Meta 3.1: Al 2023 Public and a new national water resources institutionality the resolutions that order the Monitoring of Effective Extraction (MEE) difies the legal bodies that it indicates. of surface water. Meta 3.2: Al 2025 from public-private sources tionally that have competencies in matters of climate change and water resources necessary to achieve the desirable coverage and quality in terms of universal sanitation dricos. and in the proper management of liquid waste in the national territory. The goals of this objective Goal 3.3: Expand the Public Glaciological Inventory glaciological and glacier monitoring - 3.3.1: By 2030 and glacial lakes. in disruptive events. - 3.3.2: By 2030 Mass from 9 to 18. A management process that covers the complete risk cycle. - 3.3.3: By 2030 - 3.3.4: By 2030 - 3.3.5: By 2030 through on-site stations from 1 to 3. into the sea and 20% of the treated wastewater discharged in courses - 3.3.6: To the year 2030 least 10 stations. Target 5.5: By 2030 sanitary. Meta 3.4: Al 2030 case and weather online. Target 5.7: By 2030 Meta 3.5: Al 2030 the groundwater MEE resolutions for all communes to the sewage system for water other than wastewater. of the country. Meta 5.8: Al 2030 Meta 3.6: Al 2030 Water Information System (SNUIH) or similar access to a standardized water information platform that facilitates Target 5.9: By 2030 public decision making You will have all the data and updated water information. 10% from its baseline. Meta 5.10: Al 2030 do that promote the responsible use of water at all levels. Meta 5.11: Al 2030 responsible for the water. Meta 5.12: Al 2030 of efficiency. Meta 5.13: Al 2030 Home fellings will be authorized by the SISS and will have its respective efficiency certification.176 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 177 5.14 Innovative ocean that should consider nature-based solutions for 77 | Information available at: adaptation to climate change. https://www.becausetheocean.org/ second-because-the-ocean-decla- Equally ration/ Chile's objective in oceanic matters is to consolidate itself as a conservation country that ensures a healthy and resilient ocean to the effects of climate change guaranteeing its ecosystem services and preventing the threats that en- de CO . 2 currently face human des that develop in the coastal and insular territories. read the link between ocean and climate The conservation of the ocean and the sustainable use of its resources is essential to the Ocean and Climate. Within the materialization of these initiatives for the development and survival of ecosystems and the human species. the role of the two declarations promoted by Chile and its The ocean produces 55% of the oxygen we breathe and regulates the climate to nicrites for 39 countries77 | overall speed In the last 20 years carbon loss as CO of anthropogenic origin since the industrial era. an oceanic component with an integration approach in addition and has the ability to redistribute it It is important to note that Chile interaction with the atmosphere and to exchange it COP 25 90% of the heat produced by human action through increased gases by opening spaces for discussion greenhouse effect (GHG). In consecuense like the Blue COP. In this way essential in mitigating and adapting to climate change and the report entitled Special Report on Oceans and Cryosphere of the IPCC weather Building the link between science and policy at the national level. Later its functions. Some of the threats to which the ocean is exposed important achievement was supported by the mandate to hold a Dialogue They are: the increase in temperature that alters the distribution of heat; the melt- of Ocean and Climate that would strengthen the adaptation and mitigation of the ocean continental ice (glaciers) and sea ice (Arctic oceans) to climate change. The results of this dialogue were made known co and Antarctic) and its consequent rise in sea level; acidification through a report prepared by the Subsidiary Body for Scientific Advice and ocean stratification; the loss of biodiversity and the increase in tific and Technological (SBSTA dead zones (without oxygen). These elements endanger many of the mentioned report is intended to be a starting point for the preparation of a biogeochemical processes and human activities that depend on an ocean roadmap that allows including the ocean in the different works carried out 75 | Becoming the 6th healthy country; for example under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. with greater coverage of Bad Areas- the world economy and tourism. rinas Protegidas AICHI goal of 10%. Chile has a coastline of 83,850 km of all its insular and oceanic territories; 25% of the population dis- be articulated with: 76 | Available at: https://www.acatribuye in 100 coastal communes; has one of the Economic Zones nav.cl/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/ Exclusive (EEZ) largest in the world and is one of the countries with the highest ac- i) Biodiversity through the promotion of marine protection figures national_ocea_nica_policy_of_ fishing and aquaculture. The foregoing justifies Chile's oceanic vocation chile_ok-1.pdf reflected through its history both in the geographical area cultural aspects foreign policy. On ocean conservation declaration of marine protected areas Currently, our country has 43% of the EEZ under some type of protection regime based on good fishing and aquaculture practices with co-benefits in the of Protected Marine Area.75 | conservation and sustainable use of resources; Chile has a multisectoral State policy on oceans. us: the National Oceanic Policy (PON)76 | that establishes strategic guidelines iii) Coastal Border technical interests in ocean management and whose implementation Monitoring and compliance will be carried out through the National Oceanic Program. tional. The PON recognizes the heterogeneity of interests present in the ocean iv) Waste and Circular Economy and the importance of integrating participatory management based on solutions circular of the waste management of fishing gear and gear for the pro- seabed protection v) Infrastructure when considering adequate multisectoral governance Target 1.3: By 2025 of the territory for the provision of low-carbon infrastructure liente y sostenible do to local decision makers public and private vi) Water Resources. in improving waste management supervisory publics. liquids discharged into the sea. Meta 1.4: Al 2025 changes that allow maintaining and strengthening biodiversity and the services The national commitment on ocean management in the NDC considers Ecosystemic vices of the oceans in the face of climate change. three important contributions in relation to marine protected areas Meta 1.5: Al 2025 gidas and marine ecosystems. These commitments are: i) New and environmental education in relation to the ocean and climate change. protected areas in underrepresented marine ecoregions and areas will be created protected in coastal ecosystems on wetlands national for public use that complement the marine network; ii) All areas Objective 2: Generate actions Protected marine areas of Chile created before 2020 will have their plan conservation of the stock and sequestration of carbon in marine and coastal ecosystems. management or administration and will be under effective implementation contemplating adaptation actions to the effects of climate change and iii) Actions will be evaluated and implemented to enhance the co-benefits what are you offering red marine ecosystems in marine protected areas. consider seeking and obtaining financing for the implementation Mention of the National Oceanic Program. Next and its contribution to the SDGs: mitigation and adaptation through nature-based solutions in the oceans to reduce impacts on ecosystems and strengthen the role of the sea as an ally in carbon sequestration blue carbon. Meta 2.3: Al 2025 OCÉANO ODS standardized tests for the evaluation of their adaptation capacities or climate change mitigation. Objective 1: Strengthen national institutions related to the different areas of work in ma- Meta 2.4: Al 2025 would have oceanic before 2020 they will have management or administration plans that include sions for action on adaptation and mitigation of the ocean to climate change. include actions for adaptation to climate change. Meta 2.5: Al 2025 40% of the marine protected areas created before 2020 will be Meta 1.1: Al 2025 implemented through by the Council of Ministers for the Development of Ocean Policy led by tion appointed by the Minister of Foreign Affairs Meta 2.6: Al 2025 practical implementation of the Ocean component in the ECLP and in protected in Antarctica the NDC Antarctica. end of the oceans to reduce the effects of climate change. Meta 1.2: Al 2025 tions of the State with competence in oceanic matters and coastal territories. insular and inland for the implementation of the National Oceanic Program with the ECLP.180 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 5/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 181 Meta 3.5: Al 2030 Meta 2.7: Al 2025 on the high seas as fabulously rich in biodiversity micas of the bottom and that has been designated as an area of importance Target 3.6: By 2030 ecological and biological under the United Nations Carbon Convention. Biological Diversity. Target 3.7: By 2050 Meta 2.8: Al 2025 are within protected areas such as Nature Sanctuaries Target 3.8: By 2030 and others such as the extraction of aggregates and others that affect these aqua-climatic ecosystems. ticos. Target 3.9: By 2050 Meta 2.9: Al 2030 allow the monitoring and verification of adaptation or mitigation capacities of climatic risks. tion in at least 5 marine protected areas integrating the strengthening of co-benefits in their management plans. Meta 2.10: Al 2030 conservation and management of 10 marine and coastal species classified according to State of conservation in accordance with the provisions of the Regulation for the elaboration of COLLECTION plans. Objective 3: Promote the development of information for managing the impacts of climate change of the productive activities associated with the Ocean. Meta 3.1: Al 2023 Extended Producer Identity (REP) salmon farming and artisanal fishing activity as appropriate. Meta 3.2: Al 2025 with an integrated network of sensors for the observation of the planet in te- territory and ocean of Chile of climate change by contributing to the management of the adaptation of nities across the country. Meta 3.3: Al 2030 nal for the Management of Marine Debris and Microplastics and prevent the entry of waste into the sea and beaches by 40%. Meta 3.4: Al 2030 aquaculture sector.182 CHAPTER 4/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 Road to carbon neutrality and resilience by 2050 management of 06 climate change at regional level and local A territorial issue intersectoral 07 cost 08 media Photography by Daniel Pineda184 CHAPTER 6/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 6/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 185 In Chile, climate action will be formally and permanently integrated 6.1 National coordination in the management of regional and local governments78 | through the instruments current strategic plans for development and territorial planning regional and local tion and update that are proposed in the Climate Change Framework Law Project. The formation of the Regional Climate Change Committees (CORECC) the development of the first four Regional Action Plans for Change Climate (PARCC) develop Community Action Plans for Climate Change (PACCC) the start of a multilevel coordination process tives established in national public policies and in instruments management at the regional and community level. It will be key for the effective integration of the long-term objectives the for- On a regional scale that coordinates the efforts for the transversal integration of the objectives and communal long-term and strategic guidelines related to mitigation and/or sectoral adaptation to climate change in the different regional instruments. At- ties. communal cove and within the framework of their respective capacities El MMA ities will prepare the Communal Climate Change Action Plans. methodological cesses and will generate the necessary coordination instances to 78 | The regional and local governments The figure of the Municipal Environmental Committee (CAM) will be important to ensure coherence between the Regional and Communal Action Plans refer to governments of those municipalities that are part of the Am-Climate Change Certification System and the national instruments and regional and municipal services; Municipal Welfare (SCAM) of the Ministry of the Environment (MMA) are the state entities close to the population with powers and responsibilities of the efforts for the transversal integration of the long-term objectives instruments of each territory integrate elements according to the context and the in different areas of im- and strategic regional and/or community guidelines related to change own priorities importance for climate management climate (Energy Risk management duos mobility communal instruments carried out by different departments and mu- services at the regional and communal level integrate the different territorial instruments nicipales climate change considerations. From a long-term perspective among the communal instruments Chile recognizes that all territories must act to reduce their emissions resilience and carbon neutrality in the different territories. sions to climate change for the country by 2050. Integrated coordination and cooperation between the regions tions and municipalities of the country will be key to achieve these goals keeping consistency with national policies; specific strategies and actions may differ between different territories 6.2 Strengthening of 6.3 Coordination of mechanisms capacities for managing financing for action regional and communal climate regional and local climate change 80 | The American Protection Fund To promote the implementation of projects and sectoral measures in the and the Recycling Fund of the territories it is essential to contemplate national and regional funds to Ministry of Environment d7e9 C | e Erxtiifiscteanci cough directly related to (SCAM) climate change strategies and and the HuellaChile program since nares of governments and regional and community services must be trained agriculture circular economy. the Ministry of the Environment two with new knowledge that allows an integrated understanding of and water management (MMA); the Comuna Energé program- climate change tica from the Sustainability Agency and strategic management of plans and public policies that contribute to the many funds incorporate climate change criteria as a fundamental part Energy Authority of the Ministry of long-term objectives at the subnational level. of your application requirements. Energy Risk Mitigation (PREMIR) of The design and implementation of Regional Action Plans and Co- It is important that regional and communal governments incorporate cri- SUBMIT more with course offerings and programs incorporating climate change adaptation and mitigation. The go- the construction or renovation of critical infrastructure (bridges more education and training regional and community governments must be able to coordinate and carry out diag- schools online with content related to territorial risk and vulnerability forecasts climate change Fostering public-private partnership is important to enhance available funding opportunities at the regional and community levels. The generation Regional Training Program and Mutify and prioritize adaptation and mitigation actions formation of alliances between private companies SUBDERE and the indicator and information systems platform community and territorial MMA's Adriana Hoffman. What's more and national and international associations spaces such as the funding academies suitable for the implementation of different measures available for project financing through different sources Summer and Winter of the Association-among other subjects. For it and mechanisms. The leverage of resources between the different entities Chilean Association of Municipalities It also increases the possibility of accessing both public and private resources. represent opportune instances (ACE fords for the training of authorities as international. In this aspect state councilors and municipal officials who contribute to strengthening the capacities of governments Chilean multinationals on climate finance issues them in different subjects. regional and communal issues in matters related to climate change79 |. bal Subnational Climate Fund long-term at the regional and community levels for mitigation and adaptation solutions. tion through a transformational financing model (More details in Chapter 8.1. means of implementation). It is also important to incorporate climate change in the Strategies Regional Development Guidelines and Regional Investment Preliminary Projects in order to enable the use of regional funds such as the National Fund tional Regional Development CLIMATE CHANGE MANAGEMENT AT THE REGIONAL AND LOCAL LEVEL SDG nal and Regional Fund for Local Investment 81 | Green State (mma.gob.cl) Ins- climatic. At the municipal level tructivo-de-Purchases-Públicas-Sus- circular and climate change in the purchase and contracting of different goods tentables.pdf (mma.gob.cl). and services applying sustainable public procurement criteria for materials the office ones municipal bles adaptation and mitigation of climate change81 |. waste management solids such opportunities to integrate adaptation and mitigation criteria into contracts. Meta 1.1: Al 2025 It is essential to generate information to the tool for quantifying GHG emissions at the community level greater innovation in accessibility to different sources and mechanisms of financing Footprint Chile. foundation Meta 1.2: Al 2030 term in territorial management and ensure that subnational governments can in the 16 regions of the country give concrete actions that contribute towards the fulfillment of said Long Term Policy. objectives. In consecuense Meta 1.3: Al 2030 accessibility of regional and municipal governments to said resources moving the strengthening of their capacities to implement the actions Meta 1.4: Al 2035 climatic and environmental included SCAM has a self-declared communal (territorial) inventory regional and community action plans. MMA's HuellaChile program or other internationally recognized standard the Global Protocol for Community-Scale GHG Emission Inventories (GPC)*. Meta 1.5: Al 2040 SCAM features 6.4 Goals to implement the Long Term. climate change management at regional and local level 82 | Environmental Governance (former definitive accreditation is obtained in QALY) is a continuation process the third year and deepening of the Environmental System recognizes that Municipal Environmental Certification has complied with the commitments (SCAM) Under the context outlined in this chapter Objectives and goals to promote subnational integration different public policy instruments for climate management by 2050; ration of this process is 3 years other 3 years which are detailed below: including the stages of preparation implementation and consolidation 1 year each. The first two- 3 years per cycle of vocation (SCAM three years the municipality obtains one (mma.gob.cl)). pre-accreditation Objective 2: Promote the integration of climate change adaptation and mitigation criteria in instruments of planning and territorial ordering of the regional and communal public policy. Meta 2.1: Al 2030 SCAM will have integrated climate change criteria in its Regulatory Plans Communal and in their Communal Development Plans. Meta 2.2: Al 2030 in the Regional Development Strategies (ERD). Meta 2.3: Al 2030 climate change Regional Territorial Ordering and Coastal Border Zoning. Meta 2.4: Al 2040 climate change criteria Objective 3: Promote the implementation of mitigation and adaptation actions at the regional and community levels. Meta 3.1: Al 2030 in at least two state programs associated with climate change83 |. Meta 3.2: Al 2050 maxim of Environmental-Climate Governance. 83 | For example educacion.mma.gob.cl/gestion-local/ environmental-certification-system tal-municipal/) huellachile.mma.gob.cl/) Energética (https: //www.comunae- nergetica.cl/) Road to carbon neutrality and resilience by 2050 cost 07 effectiveness (economic social) for carbon neutrality and resilience no later than 2050 08 media 09 Photograph of Daniel Pineda annexes194 CHAPTER 7/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 7/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 195 Cost effectiveness (economic from the impacts of climate change in the territories that the implementation of objectives and actions is not uniform for the country environmental and social) for the but it depends on reality territories. A) Yes carbon neutrality and resilience rization of actions with the vision of regional and communal integration thus helping the design and implementation of planning instruments no later than 2050 territorial tion and climate management instruments. In this ECLP, the starting point is dimensioned ces of investing in adaptation to Climate Change to strengthen resilience in the territories The sense of urgency to face the climate crisis requires making progress locally perceived by the implementation of global climate policies significant gains in increasing resilience and reducing emissions, highlighting the necessary coherence in the design of national policies and their de GEI en Chile courses that allow effective progress in the implementation of effective actions in climate management. based on science. Next the visions the importance of prioritizing those measures that tigation and adaptation possible environmental and social In this way Measurable national rates and information associated with territorial effects of climate change ciated to the different implementation strategies in mitigation and adaptation. 7.1 Indirect Costs of The economic evaluation of the national goal of carbon neutrality know the cost associated with the feasibility of implementing a set effective measures to reduce emissions determined. further in the territory of the co-benefits associated with these measures evaluate the cost effectiveness of said national goal do the regional and local dimension. If it is not possible to divert the current trajectory of global gas emissions, The National Goal for Resilience Presents Explicit Challenges in These Greenhouse Sessions strategy regarding indicators and effectiveness metrics in enabling measures as part of the progress in meeting the goal. economic and environmental of the countries A) Yes striving to reflect the cost of inaction on climate change It is increasingly plausible to assess the economic cost of loss and damage a base reference scenario to evaluate economic benefits of potential associated with the increase and intensity of extreme events of phenomena special adaptation measures. climatic and meteorological The design of future adaptation and mitigation plans which matic and current and projected risks latent areas that are declared at the time of preparation. estimating losses amounting to about 2 The identification of cost effective measures that nature-based solutions provide In Chile climate ambition goals main meteorological phenomena that impact the country tives. For it period 1926-2019 and co-benefits of ecosystem services respectively and impacting more than seven million people.85 | Mexico and Peru. 2020 cough and benefits may not be achieved at the same time the appropriate discounted items.196 CHAPTER 7/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 7/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 197 86 | Inaction was understood as the counterfactual or the reference future without mitigation actions or planned adaptation which possible actions are compared Costs of Inaction in Chile to 2050 • Agricultural o políticas. The Cost of Inaction. Case studies from Rwanda and Angola. For the agricultural sector, the cost associated with changes in Harvard University Press. Boston. To evidence in monetary terms the benefits of actions and policies yields of 13 crops90 | due to increased temperatures and reduced ( (2012); The cost of inaction in case of adaptation the implementation of the protocol The Ministry of the Environment in conjunction with the Economic Commission for net and labor. Nagoya in (Mexico (2014)); Climate Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) and the support of the European Union (EU) Change: The Cost of Inaction and the recently an evaluation of the costs of inaction for Chile compared to USD 428 million in one year Cost of Adaptation. EEA Technical Report No. 13/2007 ronmental agency (EEA) Official Publications of the European Ports and Beaches Communities town where the O'Higgins regions establish socioeconomic effects in each sector under study its costs represent more than 10% of the agricultural Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 87 | The RCP8.5 scenario represents the economic evaluation of these effects. A simplified scheme of the me- oats regional al 2018 one of the most extreme scenarios general methodology implemented to estimate the cost of inaction is pre- and fruit trees: apple and Maule in terms of the concentration of senta below. plum like corn. greenhouse gases (GHG) in the atmosphere Figure 19: General methodological scheme for estimation situation of inaction with respect to the cost of inaction On the other hand emissions reduction. bio climate ted. Even though there would be relevant impacts in the Biobío regions 88 | Study: Evaluation of the Cos- La Araucanía and Los Ríos inaction in the face of change these could be partially offset by the increase in revenues Climate in Chile MMA-CEPAL 92 | With negative variations in alfalfa and potatoes. The impact on labor requirements (2021). a range between -10 of the agricultural sector negatively affects the Maule and Coquimbo regions -3 and the only region that will increase 89 | The evaluation of the costs of the need to generate employment options in the affected regions labor requirements is of inaction considers a range outside the agricultural sector The Lakes (2 of effects and costs from the climate. Information available; they did not go 93 | Another consideration regarding considered all sectors These results suggest the existence of clear challenges and opportunities for this differentiated impact by area. susceptible to climate change for the implementation of adaptation actions in agriculture. For and regions suggests that the border all subsectors within the the northern and central parts of the country considered sectors. In some capacities in sectoral adaptation that consider research towards the south. Similar results with cases it was not possible to analyze effects o innovation of plant varieties adaptable to climate scenarios known worldwide due to Source: self made. sustainable soil management to the lack of information innovation in adaptation quantified for Chile. In several impacts on workforce sectors the main costs are Understanding and quantifying the effects of climate change is key to di- allow to recognize clear opportunities for the implementation of actions present in the central zone of the country point out adaptation measures that are effective in reducing the costs of the sustainable management of crops such as wheat in part due to the concentration inaction of climate change in Chile and that they consider territorial impacts of the population in that area. differentiated at the national level. Some of the most relevant sectoral and territorial results for the analysis of implications in the design of environmental policies are presented below.89 |198 CHAPTER 7/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 7/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 199 the fees of each port associated with the docking of ships and the movement • Fishing load. In the case of beaches tion of the width of beaches for recreational use in 45 national beaches. For the fishing sector for the artisanal fishing subsector. The cost related to the reduction was calculated The results for 2050 report that the operational conditions tion of hours available to carry out the fishing activity in the wave regime between the Region of Arica and Parinacota to Purranque (41ºS). The operating threshold of 1 ta more than 100 overtime hours per year of inoperability between the Region of Arica Camarones commune (19°S) and the Maule Region (35°S) product of these new conditions.94 | The pattern for the threshold of 2 on sector activity is positive. Nevertheless it changes me in the O'Higgins Region of inoperability. of carrying out management actions for the adaptation of the sector. In the same way the negative impacts for the ports of the north and center indicate de- Considering wave projections affected courses end of century. This implies a greater urgency for the adoption of measures of the century. targeted support to the sector. The results of the tons lost for the beach subsector, meanwhile, have an estimated cost of USD 5 mid-century fluctuate between 31,300 and 41,700 tons. Nevertheless losses are found in greater proportion in certain latitudes of the country of Tarapacá and Biobío (central-northern zone) and to a greater degree for certain resources (benthic and algae). The costs at $17 million nicos and fish associated with downtime estimated for the year 2050 a reduction of approximately 10% of the earnings of this subsector. Les and Las Torpederas (Valparaíso Region) and Lebu Bay (Biobío Region) A relevant result of the evaluation carried out is that fish 73% of the national total loss of the resource. The results for beaches are an alert for policy design These analyzes represent the existence of different effects of climatic change of territorial ordering matic that impact the Fisheries and Aquaculture sector and biodiversity in more than one dimension with differentiated effects. The concentration of impacts in the central zone in terms of adaptation to climate change that involves the management of suggests a priority place in which to focus measures aimed at generating local capacities in the transition towards resilient productive activities a significant effect on the incomes and lifestyles of fishermen and fishing- ensuring that effective measures are addressed in the design of instruments for the transfer of benefits artisanal machines dependent on only one type of resource necessary conversions both in terms of infrastructure in the coves as well as technical capacities for the resilient adaptation of the activity of each household fishery. by Parson's • Biodiversity 97 | The ecosystems considered are: Forests: Laurifolio In matters of Biodiversity, the quantification of the cost is carried out through 94 | What's more • Ports and Beaches the calculation of the loss of provision of ecosystem services per unit Tocopilla (22°S) and Taltal (25°S) of area for different ecosystems97 |. For the identification of impacts Antofagasta Region the additional 200 hours of downti- The assessment of the costs of inaction for Ports and Beaches considered climate change on biodiversity me 25°S. number of hours of operation for tidal waves and storms; in the case of beaches the impact of storm surges on beach erosion. The results of the distribution of flora and fauna species show Climate in Chile MMA-CEPAL (2021). 95 | Ports of Arica fagasta root medals (peatlands) current end. I lie fication of climatic threats and the incidence rates of the effects on the In consecuense associated health National Wetland Protection and Contribution NDC targets Zion in Integration - LULUCF - Forests N°5 (I5) and contribution in integration of risks and vulnerability involved in the design of Regional Plans and Co- Integration – LULUCF - Peatlands N°8 (I8) aimed at the development of metrics municipalities for climate action. to assess the capacity to adapt or mitigate climate change of wetlands (peat bogs) In summary pilots in public or private protected areas of the country. an approximation of the cost of inaction in the face of climate change Salares-type wetlands are the most affected ecosystems within each sector and dimension analyzed. of the SNASPE territory Secondly terrace tively. Therefore in these ecosystems will be the most affected in the period 2050. and aligned with the local and national context and priorities. this design should consider and articulate with the means of implementation proposed and existing territorial strategic development instruments the integration of climate change management in public policies • Health national and regional to 2050. The effect of temperature and heat waves on health was analyzed rating 73% of the national population100 | and using dose-response curves to characterize changes in relative risk due to changes in temperature 7.2 Cost Effectiveness of under the RCP 8.5 scenario effect on health as a consequence of the modification of the temperature pattern Temperatures as a result of climate change will increase over time if Carbon Neutrality they maintain the current conditions of vulnerability and adaptation. By 2050, 2,707 discharges are expected for respiratory causes and 677 discharges due to cardiovascular causes. The analysis shows that the effects will be hetero- rogeneans on the national territory and seasonal. to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 The effects are observed mainly in the mortality of the population as in hospital discharges for respiratory and car causes, while the costs associated with operation and maintenance (OPEX) are vascular diseases in the population over 65 years of age101 |. A greater increase in savings due to lower energy consumption in the carbon scenario 102 | https://chile.un.org/si- percentage of affected by mortality and morbidity will be observed in the neutrality zone tes/default/files/2020-11/ north throughout the year and a greater number of people affected in the central area of the order of USD30,000 million by 2050. Therefore Opportunities-for-Growth- 100 | The analysis was carried out in country co- to-Green-for-the-Goal-of-Des- unique munas with a larger population In the north-cordillera and austral zone of the country carbonization%C3%B3n-en-Chi- to 100,000 inhabitants or groups of minors in the warm and intermediate seasons communes that together overcome cold would have the effect of reducing deaths and hospital discharges neutrality by 2050 and updating the NDC the 100,000 inhabitants. retail cold. This heterogeneity of the results highlights the importance of the 6%. supplement-Mitigation-Policies- 101 | The selection of causes allows analysis at the zonal level consider the potential effect of deta- tion in the areas that will be most affected by climate change. What's more derived from an increase in the con- a macro-economic evaluation of carbon neutrality was elaborated 102 | pdf#:~:text=Chile%20se%20ha%20 concentration of ozone and allergens The results obtained constitute the first national analysis of those that showed that the GDP of Chile by the year 2050 can increase by 4 (both increased due to heat effects on health temperature) as part of the scams. As a future challenge, the quantification of other effects remains 2 projected results. such as that of fires in respiratory health to food and water consumption extreme thereological Co-benefits of achieving carbon neutrality by 2050 Table 9: Carbon neutrality sectoral measures included in the estimation of black carbon and local pollutants 103 | The analysis of the costs Implement the package of mitigation measures committed by Chile marginal abatement to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 Chile derives from the best information from the point of view of the direct net benefits already mentioned; tam- Measure definition of carbon in 2019) available to date in the results of the MAPS project on climate change Chile. of the reduction of local pollutants associated with reducing emissions of greenhouse gases. Electromobility strategy 40% of the vehicle fleet 60% of the private electric vehicle fleet by 2050. 104 | For further methodological detail This last item dological see: Evaluation of cobene- mentality of the climate policy with the other management instruments environmental benefits by reducing local pollutants associated with the national regulation in the control of atmospheric pollution. This co- 100% public transport 100% electric public transport by 2040. Long-Term Climate Strategy Legacy in the management of pollutants benefits the health of people electric by 2050. and ecosystems to achieve carbon neutrality and strengthens the transition to compliance with national regulations with to the year 2050 in Chile. mma best environmental standards. mo and Constructions (OGUC). Estimated benefits from GHG reduction used as reference New homes are expected to consume 35% less the “social price of carbon” determined by the CO abatement marginal cost function 2 that would allow the fulfillment of Chile's mitigation goals Electrification in heating New meas- Al 2050 are not considered tion of your National Determined Contribution in force on the date of its publication. residential didas. blication (MIDESO 0 carbon social 2 Solar thermal systems in- They are not considered new me- Solar energy is included as energy. The health benefits of reducing local pollutants respond- industries and mining didas. give to the quantification and valuation of changes in indicators such as the number of mortality cases of emergency linked to the environmental concentration of PM As results are obtained 2 the number of cases prevented period 2020-2050. Finally number of cases avoided by the unitary assessment of the quantified effects two.104 |The results respond to the analysis of the group of sectoral measures The territorial impact of the reduction of PM2 emissions implementation of the package of mitigation measures contemplated in the territorial emissions from of carbon neutrality included in the estimation of emission reductions Chilean NDC of black carbon and local pollutants that is presented below: ns of accumulated emissions by pollutant for the period 2020-2050 identifies that the greatest reductions in MP2 South Central. The areas in intense blue color represent greater reductions in available information. See: Evaluation of emissions while the grayer tones indicate lower reductions in environmental co-benefits by nes105 | reduction of local pollutants associated with the Climate Strategy long-term to reach the carbon neutrality by 2050 Chile. MMA 106 | The graphs are not comparable bles in relation to the tons emitted since the scale varies from according to the order of magnitude of the emissions of each pollution nante and period.204 CHAPTER 7/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 7/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 205 Figure 20: Regional distribution of emission reduction Table 10 Number of cases national level percentile 50 period of MP2 on the left and in the period 2020-2050 on the right. 107 | Within what is included the solar energy as energy mobility and green hydrogen in Con- Interval motor uses. Effect Cause Percentile 50 bond [95%-5%] 108 | Within what is considered measures such as new regulations [Thousands of Cases] of construction new energetics. Long Term Cardiopulmonary Mortality 100 [155 – 46] 109 | Co-benefit assessment environmental by reduction of con- Asthma (Chronic) 4 local pollutants associated with Long-Term Climate Strategy Hospital Admissions Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease 5 to achieve carbon neutrality talarias to the year 2050 in Chile. Cardiovascular disease 107 [238 – (-23)] Pneumonia 51 [88 – 13] Bronchitis Emergency Visit 1000 [1,875 – 126] Source: self made. Productivity Per- Days of Restricted Activity 14,888 [16,964 – 12,812] dida Lost working days 46,622 [51,641 – 41,603] The maps show that the greatest reductions in PM emissions 2 are distributed for the period 2020-2050 in the northern zone in the regions from Tarapaca and Antofagasta Source: self made. transportation and off-road machinery107 | and in the center-south zone in the regions Metropolitan denial . Considering the origin of the emission reduction The province of Santiago shows greater impact in terms of reduction of measures such as electric heating tion of emissions with more than 25% of the total accumulated reductions motor classification for the Commercial sector; green hydrogen for the sector of MP2 the province of Copiapó and in the southern zone the provinces of Osorno and Coyhaique. and private and green hydrogen in cargo transportation for the Transportation sector nearly 87,000 cases of death are quantified for the period 2020-2050 Reductions in PM2 concentrations prematurely avoided. ximately prevented premature deaths in people over 30 years of age over the horizon The distribution of prevented cases of premature death in the territory evaluation. The largest number of cases avoided is observed in the effect located in the provinces of Santiago (more than 60,000 cases). lost work productivity the 60,000 cases for people between 18 and 64 years old. The following table presents the group and represents 60% of the total cases. It's important to mention the total cases prevented by cause and their confidence interval.109 | what significantly depending on the province where it occurs This way mainly to the amount of exposed population. by 2050 more than double when considering the socio-environmental benefits The social benefits from the reduction of emissions of environmental pollutants at the national level they reach USD 29,482 million. The results show poor air quality. cyan the relevance of the cases of premature deaths avoided to USD 28,078 million and represent 95% of total profits. For its achievement of global and local pollutant reduction targets. the me- part lost productivity on 3 benefits according to cause and effect at the national level. prioritize them in regional and local design and implementation sectoral mitigation plans Table 11: Benefits for the reduction of local pollutants social office. Among the measures evaluated, they considered electric heating at the national level, period 2020-2050 [MMUSD]. distributed generation and motor electrification; green hydrogen and electricity mobility in public and private light transport. The analysis for sectors as mining benefits with 18% together PV Mitigation Sectoral Confidence Interval Benefit Effect Cause Percentage [MMUSD] [95%-5%] With these results taxation of emissions from the national level to the provincial level, which Long-Term Cardiopulmonary Mortality $28,078 [$52,172 - $15,601] 95 decision to strengthen regional planning processes strategic Asthma (Chronic) $1 and justice in climate transition and subnational empowerment (regions and communes of Chile). About Obstructive Pulmonary Disease Admissions $1 perspective will tend to advance in this type of development chronicle standardizing methodologies for estimating national projections Hospital and regional. Cardiovascular Disease $278 [$515 - $66] 0 Pneumonia $11 [$20 – 4] 0 Bronchitis Emergency Visit $73 [$119 – 35] 0 Productivity Days of Restricted Activity $262 [$304 - $255] 0 Lost Workdays Lost $777 [$897 - $781] 2 National Total $30,844 100% Source: self made. The provincial analysis of benefits per capita shows that the provinces from Santiago per capita benefits for the period 2020-2050 Per inhabitant. Direct valuation of GHG reductions according to social price of carbon (MIDESO valent to a 23 you have local Road to carbon neutrality and resilience by 2050 means of 08 implementation and tracking the eclp 09 attachments Photography by Bryan Contreras210 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 211 Means of implementation technological resistance111 | supporting and promoting cultural transformations social noble and monitoring of the ECLP a first exercise developed by Technological Development and Transfer for Climate Change in Chile as a means of implementing the Long-Term Climate Strategy It is organized through the EDTTCC, which is coordinated with the delivered framework, a methodological commitment to organi- by the National Science Policy The EDTTCC considers as central axes: for the design and implementation of Technological Action Plans in the prioritized sectors. In this 8.1 Means of implementation • A diagnosis of the development and transfer of technology for the context the EDTTCC defines as (1) bioclimate in Chile that reveals the limitations of the national ecosystem Technological Development: The application of Science tion of knowledge for the crea- climatic guides. in addition tion of technologies capabilities the prototyping stages of a process in the country. 110 | The Draft Framework Law for The design and execution of measures to deal with climate change re- application until its demonstration in Climate change implementation god: action dida or process of the institutional scope- also social actors and a prepared community. This is all called dynamic. final the normative technology transfer and capacity building and development of these enabling conditions for climate action financing require for the implementation of • The implementation of an enabling framework for the development of Plans practice and producing knowl- mitigation and adaptation actions In coherence with this and with the current Chilean NDC to climate change. of Framework Law on Climate Change proposes that the ECLP must contemplate are elaborated considering the inputs that deliver Evaluation of Ne- the production of new products or that 3 means of implementation be developed: the development and transfer of technological needs technological; capacity building and climate empowerment and financing. These means of implementation next cross-cutting efforts for the different sectors of the country different administrative levels of the territory. and new technologies to favor the adaptation and mitigation of change results to the work of the fa- climate in Chile. facilitating the adoption of technology The Sectoral Authorities must define and implement actions for the development and well-being of the concrete measures regarding the means of implementation presented in the ECLP through its Sector Mitigation and Adaptation Plans. in addition CORECCs should identify synergies with national policies sectoral and communal the development of measures and actions for mitigation and adaptation to change and the means of implementation defined in the ECLP. and technology transfer of the PAT recommendations are raised so that the content of change in conceptual terms is understood climate is considered in future updates of the Policy as the flow -both formal and 8.1.1 Technology Development and Transfer National CTCI. informal- of know-how technical knowledge tos To implement actions that allow compliance with both the sec- This point is essential torial as with those defined at the country level and attraction of new and better technology with a holistic and comprehensive vision of ben the development and transfer of technologies -financing climate problem. That is why establishes the commitment to "promote and strengthen the development and transfer- of countries (IPCC Thus ity and links with R&D&i Centers that accompany the transfer process 212 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 213 technological The link between the National CTCI Policy and the development and transfer information that integrate and allow data to be visualized quickly technology for climate change starts from the understanding that they are pieces and open in prioritized sectors keys and transformations to achieve carbon neutrality and resilience nationals cia of the territories. Thus, the country's long-term vision in terms of input for the identification of guidelines for research and observation technology transfer for climate change is as follows: climate-related systematic vatation of mechanisms and policy instruments for technology adoption existing worldwide Technological. Vision: The country will have tools and an institutional framework that will allow you to identify the sectors that require development The installation and formalization of a governance mechanism that monitors climate change and the development of technological action plans. Ensure the deployment of institutional coordination mechanisms associated nologically appropriate to these needs to the different areas of implementation of the EDTTCC prioritization of areas and sectors technological and implementation of the Technological Action Plans and the design and implementa- tation of processes for continuous improvement and updating of the EDTTCC in order to respond to the country's challenges on its path to sustainable development. • Technology Development and Transfer Strategy The general framework in which this initiative is inserted is the National Policy end of science 112 | National Science Policy Technology tion (minciencia.gob.cl) promoting research in all disciplines to contribute to the integral and sustainable development of Chile. Thus its focus on strengthening and promoting institutionality science bonding dadanía cheap National Ethics defines four axes of action of CORFO and the Agency for Sustainability and Climate Change (ASCC). The EDTTCC 1) Link with Society cial of science moving its understanding and appreciation and disclosure; establishes a methodological commitment to organize the identification and prioritization zation of the necessary actions that enable the development of action plans technological tion. In a first instance 2) Future development and technology transfer for climate change in Chile lodge identifying the existence of a CTCI ecosystem as an institutional framework future possibilities for the country based on sustainable development which includes representatives from the Ministries of Science able and to face the environmental and climate crisis. Foundation and Innovation; of Economy of Innovation and Development (ANID) and the Production Development Corporation 3) Strengthening of the CTCI Ecosystem lithics vestigation between local actors and coordination with international actors (END) nationals. international organizations for the implementation of technological strategies. On the other hand public gic 4) Institutional capacities nological of the CTCI public ecosystem and generate the conditions to contribute and investors to the sustainable and comprehensive development of the country.214 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 215 further related to climate change is limited and carried out by sectors in terms of technology transfer limited; there is asymmetry in the level of progress in the implementation of techno and long-term in Chile in the face of climate change technologies and skills transfer tion cally The implementation of the objectives of the strategy is carried out through the further development of a Technology Needs Assessment (TNA) process as financing (difficult access to resources); talent development for its acronym in English) for the selected areas and sectors in relevant disciplines (operation and maintenance of technologies); of informa- to identify and prioritize technology options and existing barriers to tion (there is no mapping of local initiatives their implementation and thus be able to execute them through a Technological Action Plan. information open) logic (PAT) implement the measures The general objective of the EDTTCC is to promote and strengthen the development and of resources and associated costs. technology transfer through the identification of sectors and areas essential to promote institutional changes and environmental bearable provides a methodological framework to organize the contribution in terms of development and transfer of livestock technologies at the national level» NDC committed by Chile in the year 2020. Electric ca» and the transport subsector The specific objectives of the EDTCC for public and freight transport"). are presented below: This TNA has a) Design and agree on a methodology to identify and prioritize technological areas and gaps for the identified sectors Bits and sectors that emit or capture GHG or that are impacted by stakeholders by industry effects of climate change. The prioritization criteria will be consistent analysis of the financial schemes tes with the principles of cost-effectiveness rritorialidad existing In this frame TNA consider b) Develop and establish an enabling framework that allows development to meet the associated goals of Technological Action Plans (PAT) in the priority areas and sectors NDC. The TNA process has ted. The starting point for the establishment of this framework is the specific ones for each group of technologies raised. elaboration of «Assessment of Technological Needs» (TNA for its Finally acronym in English) PATs are prepared in coherence with the development of the sectoral-sectoral plans identified in them with the support of the Ministry of Science under adaptation and mitigation rials to be published or updated. gy and adaptation plans for Water Resources and Biodiversity must include a PAT. c) Strengthen the generation of enabling conditions for development. llo and technology transfer with the purpose of generating more and better tion to Climate Change knowledge through R&D novation and to be able to promote R&D&i at the regional level. d) Facilitate national public-private cooperation and coordination and with international organizations through robust and coordinated governance. institutional dination.216 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 217 • Digital transformation 8.1.2 Capacity Development and Climate Empowerment The digitization of processes gives and to climate change and inclusion and accelerating the necessary cultural changes. and involvement so that all people and sectors consider climate change as a national and personal priority. In terms of policies that advance the digitization of the country set of Ministries General Secretariat of the Presidency Development and Tourism had to have the Digital Agenda 2020114 | a digital development of the country in an inclusive and sustainable way of Information and Communication Technologies. This Climate Agen- da is structured based on 5 axes: 1) adequacy of the regulatory framework was committed by the country in its NDC (2020) on rights for digital development Of the territory Of the inhabitants of digital skills in the population. The Digital Agenda has an impact The vision on capacity development and climate empowerment sustainability by reducing the use of physical materials such as paper reduce the number of trips to carry out procedures and achieve more efficient use aware of the State's energy and infrastructure respond to the challenges of climate change and informed citizens Other initiatives that climate or sustainable action Bios necessary to achieve carbon neutrality and resilience of the country no later than 2050. • Digital Infrastructure is to allow the connectivity of remote areas of the national territory that also enables the monitoring of climatic conditions115 |. NIC Chi- le has also done studies on the resilience of communication networks. • Capacity Development Strategy and Climate Empowerment national communications against socio-natural disasters consider effects of climate change.116 | The Capacity Development and Climate Empowerment Strategy take the six elements of the Action for Climate Empowerment • Parametric Insurance taken by governments and cover certain risks. For example in Agriculture they cover areas affected by drought or excessive rainfall. For the payment of these insurances is used photographic monitoring (images sate- a) Information and participation for the strengthening of climate action litales) of the declared areas. ethics with a gender perspective • Climate Change Observatory climate information The Ministry of Science is also looking for alternatives c) Research and Science for Climate Action 114 | http://www.agendadigital.gob. to apply its Artificial Intelligence (AI) policy to climate change. cl/#/agenda/que#top-page d) Awareness and Education for Climate Action 115 | https://www.nic.cl/anun- • ARClim cios/20210913-experimental-network. dynamic with coverage for the entire national territory html go relative to climate change (More information in Chapter 4.3 of this strategy). 116 | https://niclabs.cl/yafun/ 218 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 219 to advance them gue each component of the ACE Strategy broad participatory 2.4 Promote the exchange of skills and labor competencies should be considered in the design and implementation tion of climate change management instruments and other related in order to advance the effective implementation of non-profit climate goals. long term: 3. Promote research and science on climate change and its integration interaction with society so that it has knowledge and information 1. Promote and encourage access to information and critical civic participation that allows citizens in the institutional framework and climate governance of the country to ensure decision-making and the development of actions that contribute to the ensure the effectiveness address climate change at all levels of government and sectors of public policy incorporating the gender approach. 3.1 Promote research in the areas of climate change and social to contribute to society with knowledge and technology 1.1 Make publicly available relevant and truthful information on climate change that allows it to face the challenges of climate change. climate generated by the public sector of civil society climate action in a way that makes it accessible information feasible and reusable that helps guide decisions and actions significant climate empowerment of society. in public services at all levels and empower citizens to implement local climate actions. 3.3 Bring information about science and technology to the public that allows them to become aware of and act against climate change. 1.2 Promote citizen participation in the preparation policy implementation and implementation climate change intersectoral around the issue at the national and regional level special emphasis on the participation of the most vulnerable communities gender sensitive climate planning to its effects and groups of people less represented applying pation of the population in the search and implementation of solutions an intergenerational approach. transformational strategies to face the climate urgency. 1.3 Integrate the gender approach in all policies tions and actions of climate change so that they take into account and educational trajectory of the students ration the differentiated impacts of climate change in reducing gender gaps and highlighting environmental and climate participation with a territorial and gender approach of women as a climate solution. levels of formal education: nursery education sica and a half educational 2. Generate job skills and competencies in people and organizations. climate change adaptation and mitigation. tions to the effects of climate change. 4.2 Promote and encourage knowledge 2.1 Develop skills and competencies in the workers; environmental ethics in university and technical training students of state and municipal agencies. professional remains of innovative solutions and the creation of youth leadership gender sensitive on climate change. 2.2 Develop skills and competencies in workers of the country from the private sector 4.3 Promote and generate in the population knowledge skills and abilities for the mobilization and participation of communities-220 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 221 local authorities and agents in climate management age groups healed • In accordance with what is defined in the Financial Strategy and the commitments gender variable. acquired by Chile to face climate change Chilean store 5. Encourage collaboration with common interests for the development and implementation of actions aimed at accelerating the flow of resources towards sectors aligned with the NDC of mitigation and adaptation to climate change the means of implementation: capabilities and financing. the actors of the financial sector; and that serves as a coordinating body aimed at promoting the development of a local green financial market and a increased climate risk management. 5.1 Generate instances of cooperation and collaboration between groups of actors with common interests for the implementation of the action Under the wing of this Table, a Voluntary Green Agreement was signed between its in- climate. integrants by the Chilean Financial Authorities 5.2 Promote the development of knowledge exchanges and experience of the Treasury experiences between peers with a territorial approach local initiatives that seek to confront climate change. working to implement the commitments contained in the Agreement. 5.3 Encourage participation and development of exchange networks At national and international level beranos 5.4 Make visible the national and local initiatives related to the lowest interest rates for this type of sovereign bonds in history. climate action. river of our country in green projects is a beneficial action for the environment for society and also for the economy and its financial system. The Capacity Development and Climate Empowerment Strategy defines The framework for the definition of projects has the certificate will define the monitoring and evaluation system for the creation and strengthening of the CBI (Climate Bond Initiative) and includes projects such as: Energy of capacities and empowerment related to climate change renewable people established in the ECLP in terms of Monitoring • The Strategy of the Commission for the Financial Market to face tar climate change published in 2020 promote the disclosure of information associated with climate change; facilitate the development of a green financial market and integrate the risks 8.1.3 Financial guidelines in the climate rights to prudential supervision. Long Term Climate Strategy • The publication of the General Character Regulation 276 in 2020 by the The Climate Change Financial Strategy must be prepared by the Superintendency of Pensions with the aim that the Administrations Ministry of Finance in order to contribute to the carbon neutralizing goal of Pension Funds incorporate climate risk and trality and resilience no later than 2050 public and private financial resources value creation in the long term social • The modification of law 21,210 in the year 2020 In the year 2019 to Climate Change117 | on climate change after the Paris Agreement. This strategy defines national compensation based on offset that aims to 117 | Strategy-financial.pdf (mma. the objectives gob.cl) climate change to drive the transition to a low-carbon economy 222 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 223 • The implementation of green credits by the Ministry of Eco- Taking into consideration the gaps described It is not mine Renewable energies and circular economy in small and medium enterprises. in the NDC. worth mentioning in the second constitutional process in the National Congress more details about it In addition to the above Public incorporated in the Step-by-Step Plan seeks to contribute to the economic reactivation of the country with sustainability criteria in the face of Change by the Ministry of Finance stability. This commitment establishes that at least 30% of the projects have the following elements: of public investment of the transitory emergency fund COVID19 contribute to accelerating the country's transition to a climate-resilient economy a) Generate information and low carbon under an institutional framework of policies and measures consistent with the with the current NDC. In August 2021, the first “Sustainability Report” was published. country's climate goals temptation fiscal responsibility and sustainable development with a long-term vision of Works and Sustainable Investments». There are identified more than USD 2,600 term. million in projects that help accelerate our transition to development. sustainable development cleansed water energetic Along with these important advances challenges to scale up a greater development of green finance in our c) Promote long-term public-private cooperation in terms of country of the diagnosis made by the Center for Clean Air Policy (CCAP) and the Climate Secretariat Technique of the Green Climate Fund in Chile toss rivers d) Establish a work plan during 2020 cities and access to financing. Next fiscal framework for the determination of climate spending of these gaps by level: indirect • At the systemic level to identify and manage associated risks and opportunities subject to the availability of resources as approved by the to climate change. respective Budget Law. • At the institutional level of the sector goals defined in this strategy measures established in the mitigation and adaptation plans sectoral private according to the benefits and disadvantages of each. of projects to present to the GCF and future of the country. Efforts will be made to ensure that the prioritized projects are aligned • At the level of the financial sector low-emission and climate-resilient projects and business models often resulting in prohibitive terms and conditions for the installers. financial instruments offered. • Standardization of calls for public and private projects. fords. The above • At the level of financial ecosystems develop bankable project portfolios to affordable financing by micro company (MSMEs) significant deal flow. Helsinki Principles Climatic, chaired by the Ministry of Finance of Chile and Finland. 224 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 225 8.1.4 Guidelines and complementary climate instruments wheat to promote climate change management production processes. • Financial leverage instruments: A major challenge today is to have additional financial resources from public and private sources Climate financing and productive promotion concrete examples of this articulating capacity of different actors from the private sector ity and Climate Change (ASCC) climate action in the private sector with financing from of the same private for the fulfillment of agreed goals and actions In Chile given within the framework of the Clean Production Agreements Production Development Corporation with an MRV of mitigation and sustainability benefits in its quality of the policies of the Government of Chile whose mission is to improve the Nationally Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) competitiveness and productive diversification of the country English) recognized by the Convention. investment human and technological capabilities to achieve sustainable development in addition and territorially balanced. lack of risks in the face of adverse climatic events for the forestry sector The Ministry of Economy contributing to the economic growth of the country throughout its entire territory which makes it a key actor for the productive development of Chile since it works in an articulated and collaborative way llo and supporting high-potential sectors a sustainable economy and committed to people's quality of life. solar thermal plant in Chile. In this line for the country Therefore move the green hydrogen ability to transform the national economy millions. Similarly the emissions skills and the formation of advanced human capital weather training and/or reconversion of workers to be part of the new ble is one of CORFO's four strategic axes. For this reason sustainable industries of different lines and promotion instruments of genre. of initiatives in this area renewables and the management of water resources, among others. It is then dis- Tacan the main programs in this line: Subnational Climate Action and Finance • Financing instruments: stand out the instruments for projections focused on sustainable economic reactivation and generation An important advance in terms of articulation of the public sector to of new circular business models and use of clean technologies teeth to face climate change (circular economy ity Public Goods with Adaptation to Climate Change (2019) and ma- and the Undersecretariat for Regional and Administrative Development (Subdere) have li- On a regular basis, subsidies are delivered to SMEs and companies that have a focus on a process of dialogue between national institutions with key roles specific on sustainability issues for climate action “Communal and Regional Climate Financing and Action Group (Subnational final)” (FATFOR). The Group arises with the purpose of promoting the articulation Regarding access to financing program that seeks to finance investments aimed at combating change and international with the private sector and subnational financing schemes. Given the purpose of this group compensation of the green tax as some degree of involvement of the Ministry of Finance and/or mechanism to strengthen the development of Dipres. public-private projects at the territorial level FATFCoRy work product in the framework of this strategy the following objectives are proposed: From the enactment of Law 20,780 in September 2014 • Strengthening of subnational capacities on climate change with a focus on climate action and the planned green tax project development (PM) come on ) 2 by boilers or turbines • Preparation of a roadmap that allows the incorporation of criteria greater than or equal to 50 [MWt]. This law began to apply from the year 2017 climate change instruments in promotion and public investment instruments allowing the development of monitoring systems regional control associated with the payment of the green tax. • Identification keys to promote climate action from an approach that comple- introduced through Law 21,210 climate finance and capacity building taxed conditionally on exceeding an annual emissions threshold (and at the national and subnational level. not by installed capacity). A) Yes particulate matter ions oxides of carbon that are emitted into the air produced by establishments whose • Identification and visibility of the supply of funds available for emitting sources climate action. For this efects more annual tons of particulate matter or (b) 25,000 or more tons funding for climate action at the national and international levels annual CO. that allow the application of projects financing (mitigation Similarly who can apply the emissions they move emissions taxed through the implementation of reduction projects tion for the different applicants emissions of the pollutant (or whose effects are equivalent) within type of funding sources. of the national territory subject to said reductions being additional wheat taxpayer • Promotion of the coordination of the sources of financing identified a relevant opportunity to finance emission reduction projects strategically placed at the subnational level that cover priority climate needs but also help mitigation help mobilize private financing sas (cost-effective) effective emissions reduction. This modification will begin to operate in 2023 and is ments and types of financing and the strengthening of capacities key to improve and complement the MRV system of emission reduction complementary tions at the national level promoting climate action with environmental integrity and avoiding double counting. • Promotion of the involvement of the private sector in climate action The compensation system will allow financing projects of diverse through climate finance and capacity building complementary subnational entities civil society sustainable terios of climate change of higher hierarchy in our NDC and the ECLP. What's more nature-based Chile's native biodiversity. in addition economic-environmental that contributes to improving the quality of life of people or surplus GHG emissions women who live in areas with environmental problems or areas that concentrate projects for this purpose high industrial activity. be additional of sustainable development. Pollutant emission offsets are aligned with the objectives long-term climatic assets of our country that will contribute directly to the territories affected by said emissions GHG emission reduction market in Chile local (CO). agree under article 6 of the Paris Agreement 2 in the global market for emission reductions. In this way, this compensation system will give rise to the first market. carbon loss in national territory in Chile encourage climate action to support the achievement of our goals reduction of GHG emissions. In this way • Natural Capital Committee must observe in the compensation system and for the development of the emission reduction projects To achieve the climate objectives identified in this strategy it is necessary to incorporate the integrity of biodiversity and the contributions • Projects must be Additional economic care and restoration of nature • Reductions must be permanent. present and future of our society. This has been explicitly shown for the sciences (Ipbes 2019) • Projects must have a realistic and credible baseline. Professor Partha Dasgupta in the investigation118 | commissioned by the Department of the British Treasury: "Our economies • Projects must safeguard environmental integrity and reduce unwanted impacts za».119 | • The reductions must have traceability through a chain. For these purposes clear and transparent custody. following the guidelines of the «Base for the National Science Strategy Technology 118 | February • The projects must describe how they relate to or contribute to the NDC and will form part of the Natural Capital Committee. This Committee will begin to outline mics of Biodiversity : The Dasgupta the ECLP. its functions and members british mittee service.gov.uk/government/uploads/ lyzed in the national reality. system/uploads/attachment_data/ The initial objective of the Committee will be to contextualize the assessment process file/962785/The_Economics_of_Bio- Regarding the future national carbon market at the national level Draft Framework Law on Climate Change contemplates the power of the Ministry that can activate the effective incorporation of this component in the development Full_Report.pdf of the Environment to develop regulations for the emission of greenhouse gases for the development of our country. These include designing the future implementation 119 | https://assets.publishing. greenhouse (GHG) service.gov.uk/government/uploads/ short-lived pollutant that may be emitted by a facility system/uploads/attachment_data/ or grouping of these file/957629/Dasgupta_Review_-_ by technology Headline_Messages.pdf vos of this strategy and the NDC. Complementarily The law proposes a system of emission reduction or absorption certificates that allows their incorporation in investment decision-making. GHG emissions. This establishes that in order to comply with the regulations and public spending emission certificates may be used that certify the reduction making decisions for the future and sustainability of Chile. One of the objectives Committee initials will be to define a roadmap that can outline the pro- process and define critical steps in the short the guidelines of this strategy. 230 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 231 8.2 Monitoring a follow-up of the different climate policies and instruments that are associated with the fulfillment of the commitments that Chile has taken before the CM- ECLP verification NUCC of national policies and actions in the context of climate action. On the other hand The Climate Change Framework Law Project proposes the contents of Climate Change123 | proposes different actions and criteria necessary to 123 | https://www.senado.cl/appse- that the Long-Term Climate Strategy should include monitoring criteria are found of the goals and measures of the climate change management instruments sectoral mitigation and adaptation plans The implementation of an MRV system that allows monitoring requirements of Chile's international commitments and ensuring the compliance with the ECLP presents an important challenge in terms of creating transparency in monitoring Capacity Building and Information Gathering in addition of the contents that must be included in the sectoral mitigation plans and and adaptation: monitoring indicators involved. Thus established in the Long-Term Climate Strategy. Consequently Mitigation and Adaptation rials monitoring of climate change management measures; being the Ministry • Monitor national plans and policies associated with change of the Environment (MMA)120 | who delivers the guidelines for it providing permanent support and guidance and promoting adequate implementation coordination. intersectoral further • Prepare the information that must be presented to the UNFCCC and at the of the country on climate national. National Climate Change Action Report (RANCC) and in the Bie- Transparency Board (BTR) • Transparently manage information regarding financial support. received and needed nationally and internationally for its post- 8.2.1 Context and needs later report. The Paris Agreement (PA) in its Article 13121 | of Transparency (ETF current MRV system of the United Nations Framework Convention against both technical and financial support Climate Change (UNFCCC); This ETF defines the requirements that must have information and the necessary resources to carry out the monitoring fulfill the countries so that effective are determined at the national level. Specifications of how to implement For all monitoring system the Enhanced Transparency Framework are found in the Modalities associates Procedures and Guidelines (MPG The criteria and guidelines established in this chapter will be observed. 120 | Law 19,300 Environment 70 monitoring the progress of the implementation of the National Contributions 121 | https://unfccc.int/files/mee- NDCs tings/paris_nov_2015/application/ to climate change and adaptation concerning Article 7 of the AP and infor- In order to ensure compliance with the objectives and goals of this pdf/paris_agreement_spanish_.pdf information on support in the form of financing 122 | technology https://unfccc.int/sites/default/ files/resource/CMA2018_3a02S.pdf received (articles 9 to climate change amend actions and have an efficient management of resources. In order to ensure compliance with the objectives and goals of this Strategy clear understanding of the implementation and effectiveness of plans to climate change amend actions and have an efficient management of resources. mind the ETF To have a common understanding of these processes and what each stage of monitoring means (MRV) general on the matter. Table 13: ECLP MRV criteria and principles Table 12: Definitions for MRV processes Climate Change Framework Law Project Monitoring (M) Policies Draft Framework Law on Climate Change will be inspired by the following principles: 124 | Refers to the monitoring or measurement of data and information on emissions/removals threat of mitigation actions may involve direct physical measurement of GHG emissions of emissions or emission reductions using activity data and emission factors responsible for changes relevant to sustainable development (co-benefits) and implementation progress. In terms • Transparency: it is the duty of the State to facilitate timely and adequate access to information on climate change. general promoting the dissemination and awareness of the subject and reducing the asymmetry of information. sustainable development and climate action goals. • Participation: it is the duty of the State to have mechanisms that ensure the right to participation of all Report (R): person or group of people in climate change management It consists of the compilation of information in standardized formats so that it is in formats accessible to a variety of users the mitigation and/or adaptation objectives established. Verification (V): • Progressivity: the measures aimed at combating climate change must advance gradually in order to comply with the purpose of this law. It is based on the review establish a degree of integrity and reliability. The verification helps to guarantee the accuracy and compliance with the • Transversality: the action of the State for the management of climate change must promote coordinated participation established procedures and can provide meaningful feedback for future improvements. Can realize from the Government at the central level zarse through means of verification 124 | https://www.senado.cl/appse- Source: Own elaboration based on WRI (https://files.wri.org/d8/s3fs-public/MRV_101_0.pdf) and UNDP (https://www.adap- tation-undp.org/resources/manual/monitoring-and-evaluation-manual-community-climate-change-adaptation-fund) nado / templates / tramitacion / index. php?# 234 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 235 Reinforced Transparency Framework of the Paris Agreement In terms of monitoring adaptation measures and processes Developing Regarding policy MRV • Report on the establishment or use of national monitoring and evaluation systems for the application • Continuous improvement of reporting and transparency over time. tion of adaptation measures. • Promote transparency are in the development phase. • Ensure maintenance of the frequency and quality of reports in accordance with their respective obligations. tions under the Convention. • Provide the following information in relation to monitoring and evaluation: (a) Achievements the resilience • Ensure that double counting is avoided. Assessment and indicators of the following aspects: (i) how adaptation has increased resilience ence and reduced the effects; (ii) the cases in which the adaptation is not sufficient to avoid the effects; (iii) the effectiveness of the adaptation measures adopted; (d) The application • Ensure environmental integrity. nification and application; (ii) how support programs respond to specific vulnerabilities and adaptation needs; (iii) the influence of adaptation measures on other development goals; Particularly (iv) good practices politics • Transparency: Assumptions and methodologies must be clearly explained and documented to facilitate replication and evaluation. If documentation is not provided plied with the other principles. cular on: (a) The sense of ownership • Accuracy: In relation to mitigation actions of emissions/removals. Estimates should not be systematically over or under emissions and the sustainability of those results. real nes/absorptions Uncertainties should be reduced as much as possible. Appropriate methodologies must be used with IPCC guidelines. Source: self made. • Consistency: the information must be consistent in all its elements with reported information in previous years following. It is also necessary to use consistent data sets to estimate emissions and removals of sources/sinks • Comparability: The estimates and definitions must be comparable between the Parties. Method- ologies and formats agreed by the COPs. Assignment of source/sink categories of the IPCC. • Completeness: In terms of mitigation IPCC Guidelines. Other existing specific source/sink categories. Complete geographic coverage of sources/sinks of a Party.236 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 237 8.2.4 ECLP MRV Process Figure 21: ECLP MRV Process First of all independent MRV of coordination that involves different systems and platforms or under development. From the point of view of the Climate Change Framework Law Project it can be seen that the MRV process associated with the ECLP through different systems meet defined criteria the resources of the different sectors for the compilation information vision. For this all MRV systems with the criteria to be able to correctly monitor the different goals. As you can see in the following figure of the ECLP goal, monitoring of each of the pre- assumptions and defined sectoral commitments. This will in turn allow greater organization and coordination between the sectors It will be very useful for commitments that have more than one sector associated. This way existing and/or in planning led by the Office of Climate Change of the MMA and that are linked to the Climate Change Framework Law Project the NDC and the ECLP. It should be noted that other ministries are also making concrete efforts in the matter climate change management instruments great coordination between the ministries that lead these initiatives and the MMA. Part of these initiatives for monitoring and follow-up of sectoral actions are presented in the section on sectoral contributions and investment components. integration of this document. Own elaboration. monitoring In order to monitor compliance with the long-term mitigation objective perform progress analysis in the NDC and the sectoral budgets defined in the ECLP. In this sense, the system is key. National Inventories (SNI) already existing in Chile and in the process of constant review and improvement based on IPCC guidelines. 238 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 CHAPTER 8/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 239 125 | As part of the Agreement As a complement to this system Paris agreed to create a National Prospective Theme Initiative (SNP) Capacity Building for ex ante approach Transparency (CBIT in English) institutional capacities and The main objective of the SNP is to develop a dynamic for forestry coordination techniques of the countries to comply with and standardization of the updates of national projections of emission-tourism with long-lived and short-lived greenhouse gas (GHG) transparency requirements of the Paris Agreement. CBIT Chile is also its socioeconomic impacts. The future SNP will tend to facilitate climate (A) financed by the GEF UNEP and implemented in the Ministry of GHG environment river. gave Environment and establishing a system of coordination and transference of specific geographical point for certain chains. (or punctual in certain of information between the relevant agencies. The system complements chains). The three variables (A rá the analyzes and specific surveys of each of the institutions due to climate change on the system in question (more details relevant an additional tool to these institutions for their own analysis and ca- and Assessment of Adaptation in the long term). hovers noteworthy grant technical robustness to the SNP in terms of adaptation and data that it uses and generates is of such quality that it follows the principles of Verification and Evaluation appearance of adaptation quality pillars under which the National Inventory System of Ga- of the measures and their effectiveness Greenhouse effect ses of Chile. of continuous improvement that seeks to increase the resilience of the country (See Chapter 4.4. Indicators for Monitoring and Evaluation of Adaptation Another system in operation and housed in the MMA is the program 128 | GIZ 2014 «Development of in the long run). Evaluation is a constant evaluation of the usefulness 126 | Footprint Chile – Footprint Chile FootprintChile of an intervention at a specific point in time (mma.gob.cl) and gradual implementation of GHG emissions management in or- and Adaptation Assessment: a if a policy has been effective in achieving the established objectives128 |. public and private organizations from Chile; has a Guide MRV system» In particular GHG emissions monitoring (what is being done?) and actual results (what to the Single Window web platform for the Registry of Emissions and Transfers 129 | Christiansen consequences do our actions have?). The evaluation is prior to a new Pollutants Agency (VU RETC). The HuellaChile MRV web platform belongs to G. and Naswa cycle or update of a plan or intervention129 |. free access and is designed to facilitate its use and navigation measurement of adaptation: per- to different user profiles; has online calculation modules that incorporate emission factors and global warming potentials Report and compare the results of the adaptation. UN Environment Association officers Environment-DTU and events Harley ISO 14067: 2019 N. & Van Minnen HuellaChile allows reporting and follow-up in a standardized way change vulnerability and adaptation mitigation actions implemented internally by organizations indicators. Technical Paper 2008/9 that individually or as a whole allow to manage and reduce emissions, being key to guarantee the of the European Topic Centre on annual GHG emissions of an organization Air and Climate Change ISO14064/2:2019. The information verification process is voluntary to avoid unnecessary overload in the different sectoral teams. Environment Agency. and recommended In relation to the above tions that seek to obtain a stamp of recognition from the Huella- involved have a periodic survey of information on Chile. With the support of the initiative for the Transparency of Climate Action its sectoral progress; this will be achieved through the guidelines of the MMA (INVENTION) so that there is coherence with the defined criteria and between the dis- MRV complementary to your web platform red systems and instruments 127 | https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/ carbon footprint portability at local government level tion as those that contribute to adaptation. default/files/standards_supporting/ the guidelines of the Global Protocol for GHG Emission Inventories at Scale GHGP_GPC%20%28Spanish%29.pdf Comunitaria Climate Change National – RANCC Climate Change Framework as the instrument that contains the policies plans in climate change management instruments or other relevant information has been proposed by other public bodies progress in the short term. The RANCC will group the information in the National communications following matters: (a) Adaptation: constituted by the measures contained in the Sectoral Adaptation Plans and plans and other initiatives that are developed in the country; (b) Mitigation: constituted Verification: by the measures contained in the Sectoral Mitigation Plans and the because (c) Means of Implementation: constituted by the actions aimed at im- As mentioned above complement the development and transfer of technology capacity building and financing at the regional and local level: general description of the measures and actions at the compliance level of the established procedures and can provide feedback territorial. significant feed for future improvements. On an international level They are used to verify compliance with commitments and/or indicators. • Biennial Update Report: In December 2010 Conference of the Parties 16 where it is pointed out that developing countries must present both means of control and concrete evidence Convention biennial update reports (IBA or BUR date reports) containing up-to-date information on inventories (UNFCCC) greenhouse gas emissions and on citizen measures through the state climate change information platform. mitigation in december 2011 Chile associates itself with the Durban Results, where it is pointed out that the Coordination for the MRV of the ECLP in the public sector The first Biennial Update report must be submitted to the Con- no later than December 2014. The main objective of the Biennial Update Reports is to encourage countries to present have information in a consistent way and timely; considering specific national circumstances. Chile instruments and systems in the different associated Ministries the same has presented 4 Biennial Update Reports and 2020. As of 2024 of Transparency (BTR for its acronym in English) additions to the Biennial Update Reports national inventory of anthropogenic emissions by sources and removals by sinks of greenhouse gases the IPCC2006 guidelines base of the NDC and every year from 2020 onwards) and report of the tions promoted by the public sector of Chile130 |; this work will allow defining cation in the Capacity Building Initiative 7 major gases (CO necessary to monitor the progress achieved in the mitigation actions that will be presented by the sectoral authorities financed by the GEF application and compliance with the contributions determined at the level in their Sectoral Mitigation Plans (PSM) national under Article 4 of the Paris Agreement; Information rela- in this chapter. This system will be designed in accordance with the provisions of the Environment. by the current international requirements of the UNFCCC to the impacts of climate change and adaptation work accordance with the national requirements indicated in the Mar- under Article 7 of the Paris Agreement; Support Information climate change code in the form of financing sectoral mitigation efforts. This way capacity-building required and received under articles topic will be designed in coordination with the SNP and with the National System 9-11 of the Paris Agreement; among other requirements. Chilean Inventories • National Communications: National Communications are presented submit every four years to the UNFCCC and contain information on national circumstances monitoring tion to climate change years regarding the development of policies and instruments and their institutions nationality and international commitments Indicators for Monitoring and Evaluation of Adaptation in the long term. This recent development implies important technical challenges in the metrics and indicators for monitoring adaptation measures. Since these advances with support from the Capacity Building Initiative for Transparency (CBIT) project is in a process of development and operationalization of a Sheet Route to consolidate a monitoring and evaluation system for adaptation to climate change in Chile relevant and pertinent to quantify the progress of adaptation in Chile in the sectors most vulnerable to climate change This will strengthen understanding of the adaptation process in line with the NDC and the ECLP. in a complementary way do in deepening the information related to indicators of gender and change climate at the sectoral level and on a regional and communal scale. ECLP and NDC monitoring platform and operate a NDC 2020 monitoring database conceptual modeling developed in the Climate Change Office pointing out the necessary indicators for monitoring and training the eventual users of the system. In parallel a monitoring mechanism is being designed of the needs and support received and delivered by Chile in the framework of the CMNUCC (BTR) with the Enhanced Transparency Framework of the Paris Agreement. as i know Has mentioned Social is preparing a proposal to follow up on the commitments of the Social Pillar of the NDC 2020 of Chile of verification for the monitoring of the social component. In terms of equi- ity and gender equality Climate ce of the gender goals of the social pillar of the ECLP and the NDC: (1) Selection and systematization of experiences in each of the sectors They have already implemented actions with a gender approach. The systematization of experiences will take place by 2030 that goals and indicators update processes are carried out an update on the analysis of gender mainstreaming potential (3) The progress of all those goals that count will be evaluated and reported. have with gender markers transversal to the sectors of the ECLP.244 CHAPTER 4/8 | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 Road to carbon neutrality and resilience by 2050 attachments 09 Photography by Daniel Pineda246 ANNEXES | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 ANNEXES | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 247 Annex 1: Going deeper 3) Participation to strengthen the proposal Instances to deepen specific technical aspects of the instrument and capacity-building training. In the elaboration In a complementary and transversal way to the whole process ECLP participatory participation of the Advisory Committee for Climate Action Climate Change Advisor Interministerial Technician on Climate Change and the Gender and Climate Table bio climate of the ECLP. A foundation for the design and development of climate policy is the par- citizen participation From Chile participatory while maintaining a multi-stakeholder focus is reflected throughout the document. During the participatory process of construction. It should be noted that the entire process of participatory elaboration is tion of this instrument tion from the public sector mma.gob.cl/portal/consulta/107 youths 1. Early Participation The participatory elaboration process began in May 2020 based on the following principles of citizen participation for the management of climate change: Early participation for the participatory elaboration of the proposal of the ECLP took place between May 2022 and April 2021 of 71 workshops developed virtually due to the contingency of CO- • Encourage the participation of any person or group of people VID 19. The work schedule for the sessions included sessions with presen- In the elaboration of climate change. people also allowed to promote multi-stakeholder participation from all the national territory • Facilitate instances of citizen participation cross-cutting perspectives through the analysis of social issues close and inclusive such vulnerable communities of the ECLP. This early participation process contemplated the development of workshops and roundtables with three specific focuses: • Facilitate timely and appropriate access to information on change climate i) Identify visions reducing information asymmetries. long-term climate change at the sectoral and intersectoral level • Articulate adequate coordination between the different institutions nes and representativesactors linked to the management instruments The purpose of this process was to analyze and develop participatory of climate change. sectoral and cross-cutting long-term challenges and sectoral instruments that allow progress towards the goal of being a country The participatory elaboration contemplated three defined stages with the finali- carbon neutral and resilient by 2050. For the above, three ability to facilitate and encourage the participation of any person or group types of workshops: of people in climate change management as regional and local: • Cross-cutting workshops with the Interministerial Technical Team for Change 1) Early participation 2) Formal citizen participation through public consultation of the ECLP proposal of interested parties to convene • Transversal vision workshops and to complement and validate the information to be presented in the sessions multi-actor and multi-level workshops with the presence of representatives of work. These organisms will be the ones that will have to prepare sectoral plans state and non-state. of mitigation and adaptation. • Mitigation and adaptation sectoral workshops and multilevel organizations with the presence of state and non-state representatives, the main guidelines were analyzed state. go term in terms of climate change of each sector more on mitigation (for 8 sectors) and adaptation issues (for 11 sectors). In the third session they were addressed and analyzed jointly for mitigation The participatory process was carried out between May and October 2020 and adaptation (for the 14 sectors) the main challenges and good practices running a total of 39 job instances on sectoral and territorial instruments ETIC workshops of long term worked in the first sessions. Mitigation and adaptation sector technicians. The call considered to a wide variety of public sector representatives Regarding the Sectoral Technical Workshops NGOs/civil society and international organizations lower the cross-cutting long-term vision in mitigation and adaptation an equitable distribution between the different categories Leading three cross-cutting workshops for the topics: i) Human settlements special emphasis on achieving balanced participation between women and men and life in communities and incorporate representatives from different regions of the country into the call nature and iii) Transition of productive sectors. and representatives of youth organizations and indigenous communities. The 39 workshops developed in this stage of the elaboration process Considering the above, there was a total of 1,230 participants 53% of which were women and 47% men. The development of sesio- neutrality and resilience remotely allowed the incorporation of regional participants beyond the aspects of the sector which corresponded to 30% of the participants. presence of youth organizations and indigenous communities. you are of capabilities The work sessions with the ETICC aimed to collect the insights disaster risk and resilience diversity of public sector representatives to cross-cutting visions were identified as priority issues for to contents and identification of relevant technical inputs the ECLP: relieve national integration and validated the information presented in the workshops for the identification just transition and sustainable development of specific goals and objectives in the ECLP proposal. The main- the issues of indigenous peoples and gender. On the other hand the results of the work carried out with the ETICC importance of incorporating all stakeholders of society the importance of i) highlighting national integration design of climate policies as well as in the implementation of actions. lights on how to align ECLP to existing and developing instruments (for example matics on indigenous peoples and gender in the strategy roll human rights and sustainable development as general aspects to address and also to define the relationship of change management instruments in the ECLP; iv) Incorporate ECLP governance of inter-institutional articulation and linkage with the citizenry; v) Make ex-purpose to strengthen them and make them effective for the fulfillment of the implicit in the contents of the ECLP the link with the private sector and with national goals The academy; vi) Incorporate flexibility to capture new topics plo and green recovery and evaluation of measures towards carbon neutrality In the case of the sectoral workshop sessions sectors deepened in the ECLP: Water resources water security for adaptation sity Infrastructure they were defined from the competent bodies in the management Parallel to the above of climate change defined in the Framework Law Project on Climate Change Robustness Analysis of Carbon Neutrality and Resource Adaptation tico. The sectoral authorities were involved early in the water process preparation Robust Decision) tions for robust decision making under uncertainty scenarios The main findings aiming to take the appropriate strategies in this regard. that reduce the vulnerability of the carbon neutrality trajectory The road to carbon neutrality by 2050 of measures and an analysis of cost effectiveness for the medium and long term such a strategy in the short what importance and interest for decision-making on climate policy. On the other hand tica potential design adjustments to achieve the goal of neutrality. In this analysis of information and intersectoral consensus given the transversality context and the RAND Corporation Inter-American Development to assess the robustness of the carbon neutrality scenario uncertainties you might face and to a participatory process with state and non-state experts. The main objective of this analysis corresponded to study the pessimistic scenarios of the carbon trajectory • Workshops of experts at the national level: Two workshops were held neutrality Long-term and the corresponding commitments. The first aimed to publicize the international experience The participatory process the RDM methodology Specifically, two work instances were considered: the first consisted of 6 adaptations to climate change in the water resources sector and the second sectoral workshops held during June 2020 He called on the 6 sectors present in the GHG Inventory: 1. Energy size and urban development and Biodiversity of the first round of workshops was to allow experts and other stakeholders • Macro zonal workshops: 6 hydrological macro zones were defined for stakeholders express their views about their priorities and success metrics under policy goals in each sector that can contribute to decarbonization tives of the country There was a total participation of 190 people tion women. In each of these macrozones, a workshop was held with agents Using the RDM methodology key belonging to public institutions results miner DAMI Matrices were used that the participants were representative people with knowledge Models and Uncertainties. knowledge of the particular conditions of each macrozone in question. The second round of participatory workshops included the same sectors and in 2 workshops the advances of the project were presented to obtain feedback from local experts on the approach of the methodology and the analyzes of the first round of macro objectives that seek to improve and preserve water security of workshops the respective modeling for the same sectors of the first round Separated into discussion groups. of the need for quality water sources and proper use of resources. It also recognizes the need to use models or tools The participatory process made it possible to collect valuable inputs for the analyzes to be able to evaluate the effect that the uncertainty and the actions considered robustness of carbon neutrality by 2050 have on the achievement of objectives in terms of water resource management. RDM. Specifically performance (metrics reflecting policy metrics and goals) actions (public policies goals) and uncertainty (uncertain factors that may affect the ability to achieve goals) in terms of sectoral goals iii) Identify the opportunities and challenges to register their individual commitments through the page people who participated in a series of conversations and surveys incorporate and relate the vision digital. Between December 2020 and January 2021 regional and community climate action with the national national and regional frameworks framed in the development of the Strategy of Action for Climate Empowerment (ACE) people from all over the country. As well Subnational action (regions and communes of Chile) level is key to achieving carbon neutrality and resilience by 2050. During 500 people from all over the country on issues related to inclusive recycling the early participation process, virtual workshops were developed for and climate change. further the 16 regions of the country convening members of the Regional Committees representing the academy of Climate Change (CORECC) pallets 428 people participated in workshops throughout the country Together with the mobilization of the participation of full gender parity (50% women chest participants were regional public service officials concrete climate action initiatives that 31% corresponded to municipal officials belonging to territories from all regions of the country to 82 municipalities in the country. The remaining participants attended on behalf of from the academy and scientific community representation of the academy (8%) and of organizations and members of society NGOs and civil society civil (10%). of said platform consists of the promoters of the initiatives identified The main results achieved are related to the identification visible through the wall of initiatives. These initiatives are related of the most important regional and municipal instruments of public policy to the adaptation and mitigation of climate change important for the subnational integration of the ECLP such as affordable and non-polluting energy ties to the integration of long-term objectives at the regional and municipal levels. conservation of biodiversity and ecosystems These contributions made it possible to highlight priority issues for many regions sustainable such as those related to water resources water and water security. diversity more of coastline This great effort represents an important milestone to identify the opportunities that exist for integration at the regional level and makes visible the citizen actions that are being implemented throughout and community of the long-term objectives proposed for Chile I go from the country. International support is key to the maintenance and development of the proposal of the chapter on Climate change management at the sub-level of this great digital community national (regional and communal). expansion at the Latin American level. That is why we will work to continue and empower the community by fostering the linking of the citizen sectors iv) Workshops for the Climate with the ECLP that organizations and people who have an initiative to meet each other Between September 2020 and January 2021, the Por el tribuyan project was developed to concretize its actions Climate; a citizen meeting program with the purpose of converting the country's medium and long-term. people in protagonists of action against climate change from the local to have a global impact passion and collaboration. This program Environment with the support of the European Union International Social Innovation (fiiS) gital of all country. The central objective has been to involve citizens with the Chile's climate agenda and ambitions. Among the main results of the project 132 | #ReaccionaPorElClima – Re-execution of the digital platform Reaccionaporelclima activate and join for the sustain- as a meeting point for citizens bility to get involved and get involved with climate action in Chile. through bliss platform cases related to climate change 2. Formal citizen participation that are relevant to communities. To deepen the commitment to make visible and disseminate the knowledge ancestral rights and good practices of local communities and indigenous peoples nas on protection of biodiversity Made between May 27 and July 30, 2021 make the ECLP proposal known to all the diversity of people throughout for the construction of a web platform designed to be the repository from the country citizens for the preparation of the instrument in its final version. a first informative stage closure stage and feedback. This process had 103 attendees The process had the support of the German Government through the Agency of which 62% corresponded to women and 38% to men. To these German GIZ workshops were attended by people who identified with different original peoples broadcast webinar rivers Ancestral meetings and capacity building and development workshops at the posteriormente el Huilliche regional and Atacama Considering that one of the main issues raised in the temporary participation lknam. As for the Indigenous Communities or Associations present throughout prana is the development of capacities and knowledge at the level of the territories. throughout the cycle of workshops further throughout the process. of Carbon with the support of UNEP DTU. Total rum 44 instances throughout the country with full gender parity (50% women i) Regional Citizen Workshops Between August 9 and 20, 2021, 20 workshops were held with a focus on the Regional Climate Change Committees (CORECC) within the framework of the program During the 9 weeks of public consultation of the ECLP proposal Citizen workshops were held in all regions of the country and an alcannal workshop in the context of preparing the ECLP. 16 regional instances were held ce national Electronic for Citizen Participation of the Ministry of the Environment identify relevant concepts of ECLP at the regional level and open spaces for regional governments in the development of public policy for change for contributions citizen sion. These workshops were attended by a total of 707 attendees which 53% corresponded to women and 47% to men. Regarding the issues of concern of each region in terms of mitigation and adaptation regional presentation reached the largest call with active participation throughout the country. Regarding the Climate Change (PLMCC) vocations the public sector natural) with 20% of the total attendees and organizations of the so-climate at regional and community level. 653 attendees participated in these workshops. civil society representing 17% of the total. The participation of the tent peoples of all the regions of the country originating in these workshops was 9% with respect to the total number of attendees. and 55% men. ii) Workshops with a focus on Ancestral Knowledge iv) Assignment presentation workshop sector of carbon budgets These workshops were developed with the particular objective of giving co- Recognize the commitments associated with local communities and indigenous peoples The proposal for the allocation of carbon budgets was prepared of Chile that were incorporated into the ECLP proposal and move forward based on a methodology developed with the support of consultants Ricardo in the bases for the co-construction of a platform that makes Energy and Environment and Deuman visible ancestral practices for consideration in programs workshop the sectoral budgets and mitigation efforts and their results by the European Union (EU) to inform participants and receive feedback sequence of analysis and the step by step of the work for the assignment. This through participatory dynamics in work groups. As a result, the United Nations on Climate Change was held to promote climate action the identification by the attendees of the barriers and opportunities both in Chile and in Latin America and the Caribbean. For it associated with each of the mitigation measures of the different sectors holding two types of workshops in all regions of the country: and the associated risks. 102 attendees participated in this workshop with full gender parity (50 men • Workshops "Practical Actions to Neutralize the Carbon Footprint": Workshops held with local governments 3. Participation for the differentiated in each group: strengthening of the proposal — Local governments: Conversation between agents of local governments to reduce the impacts in their municipalities. System was addressed Municipal Environmental Certification Municipal Environmental adaptation and mitigation of climate change for municipalities. For some regions, there was the participation of an independent municipality. After having the ECLP proposal guest who shared developed actions and the challenges to which they technical channels they faced. to deepen specific aspects of the instrument. This activities were carried out between August and September 2021 online with the participation of 926 attendees — Companies and citizens: Discussion of actions to reduce the footprint and 49% men. of carbon in the daily life of people and companies in the region. Specific initiatives were presented to reduce the carbon footprint i) Workshops Indicators of Adaptation in the reality of each person its implementation. It ended with the participants taking a commitment to action towards carbon neutrality. On September 3, 2021, 11 sectoral workshops were held within the framework of the consultancy for the development of indicators for monitoring • “Territorial Carbon Footprint and its Collaborative Management” workshops: bullfighting and evaluation of the progress of adaptation to climate change at the level These workshops, complementary to the previous ones national. This consultancy is part of the Capacity-Building Initiative Project, Huella Chile Program of the Ministry of the Environment for the development for Transparency (CBIT) Environment and implemented in the Ministry of the Environment of Chile. Es- at local government level These workshops sought to strengthen the adaptation indicators of the ECLP to establish the community carbon footprint, which is supported by a program for the forestry and agricultural sectors Infrastructure nery and coastal border. In total they had 82 attendees They were women and 40% men. In total, 32 workshops were held with 792 attendees from the which 52% were women and 48% men. ii) Regional and Community Workshops iii) Workshop «Advancing in the National System of Prospective of «Advancing to Carbon Neutrality» GHG for Chile QA" These workshops were held in all regions of the country between 17 August and September 10, 2021 the public sector from carbon neutrality to 2050 from the regional and communal reality elaboration framework of the ECLP. The design of the future National Prospective System (SNP) of emisio-258 ANNEXES | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 ANNEXES | MINISTRY OF THE ENVIRONMENT | 2021 259 greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions of the progress and upcoming updates of Chile's NDC and ECLP. Organi-Alliance; Valentina Duran zed by the Ministry of the Environment with the collaboration of UNEP-DTU Mapuche del Lof Karumanke Partnership of Denmark tive for Transparency (CBIT); Its objective was to analyze and discuss the application of the Environment of various elements of data quality assurance and control (QA/QC) that would allow improving both the quality of the information with which it is prepared by State authorities GHG emission projections as well as their results will stop. non-governmental organizations This instance had counterparts from different ministries of the Interministerial Climate Change Team (ETICCC) various regions of the country and professionals linked to the mitigation of GHG emissions other countries Table 14 Sessions Advisory Committee for Climate Action region of Subject Date 4. Instances of participation Session 1: Participatory elaboration process of the ECLP 06/10/2020 transverse Session 2: The Climate Risk Atlas as a tool for Adaptation 11/05/2020 Session 3: Role of the Ocean in long-term climate policy: Ocean Climate Action 12/16/2020 i) Advisory Committee for Climate Action Session 4: Proposals for measures and indicators regarding Nature-based Solutions (NbS) 01/08/2021 to face climate change The entire process of participatory elaboration of the ECLP contemplates the accom- Session 5: Methodology proposal to determine the sectoral Carbon Budgets 01/21/2021 support of an Advisory Committee for Climate Action. This committee is created to advise the Ministry of the Environment in the preparation process Session 6: Advances in the definition of indicators of vulnerability and adaptation at the national level 03/13/2021 of the ECLP. The committee is made up of 32 members. Schmidt Session 7: Options to achieve carbon neutrality by 2050 under conditions of uncertainty 04/27/2021 Andrés Couve Juan Carlos Jobet Session 8: Main contents of the ECLP proposal submitted to Public Consultation 05/20/2021 climate change plot; Gonzalo Munoz former Head of the Climate Change Office of the Ministry of the Environment executive CR2; John Calderon stability and climate change; Carlos Finat Seebach Eduardo Bitran académico; Flavia Liberona What of Municipalities in the Face of Climate Change sectoral Inc; isabella villanueva temptation (CEUS); Joaquín Cortez Session 11: Negotiation and climate action on the way to Glasgow 09/10/2021 financial (CMF); Joseph Monge Ugarte Head of the OECD of the Global Center on Adaptation director of the UCV Climate Action Center; Margarita Ducci Global Compact Network Chile; Marina Hermosilla Businesses for Climate Action (CLG Chile); Maximilian Bello ii) Ministerial Scientific Advisory Committee on Climate Change of a set of considerations that would ensure the incorporation of the gender approach during the implementation and monitoring phase of the ECLP. The Ministerial Scientific Advisory Committee on Climate Change (CCACC) as established by the Climate Change Framework Law Project acts as an advisory committee of the Ministry of the Environment in the aspects scientific data required for the preparation of climate change management instruments. The CCACC was organized into seven technical work tables, which are coordinated • Session 11 of the table dinated by Maisa Rojas and led by: Sebastián Vicuña and Paulina Aldunce sion was to reflect on the Opportunities presented by the pro- (Adaptation) Pablo Marquet (Ecosystems and Biodiversity) Los Muñoz (Cities) of gender gaps within the 14 sectors of the ECLP During the year 2020 deliver inputs to the 14 sectors that would allow them to add to the production formally to the CCACC the elaboration of a document that analyzes the So- original setting responsive and transformative goals for gaps Nature-Based solutions and comment on their feasibility of application. of genre. tion in the ECLP. Thus Marquet for incorporation into the ECLP • Session 17 of the table emphasizing those NbS with the greatest mitigation and adaptation potential mission was to propose a set of considerations or protocols for for the country: Forests the mainstreaming of the gender approach in compliance with the and Andean Cryosphere. goals for the 14 ECLP sectors. To achieve the objective, it is invited people attending to participate with their contributions through further of an online file formatted with the information of each of the regarding the ECLP proposal submitted for public consultation typologies of identified goals.1 The results of the task work current environmental regulations ller Climate Change and the latest available scientific evidence. this report considerations to include a gender approach in the implementation of the was reviewed by the Ministry of the Environment and other ministries goals and actions of the 14 sectors participating in the ECLP. involved in the ECLP definitive. CCACC members took over one or more chapters to review and comment The total number of participatory instances in the process of preparing the with the support of invited researchers ECLP They include: Anahí Urquiza (Adaptation and management of climate change); sandra the process Cortes (Health); Álex Godoy (waste and circular economy); Waldo Bustamante were women and 49% men (Building and Cities versal Yáñez and Doris Soto (Fisheries and Aquaculture); Patrick Catalan Christian Escauriaza Winckler (Coastal Edge); Andres Pica Mardones (Evaluation cost effectiveness for carbon neutrality). iii) Gender and Climate Change Table The Gender and Climate Change Table was the body that advised technically the incorporation of the gender approach during the process formulation of the ECLP the application of the Gender and Climate Change Checklist conducting training on the gender approach to the teams technicians in charge of the ECLP analyze the proposed goals and objectives of the 14 sectors and development Acknowledgments The ECLP had the valuable support of the following international organizations: