C O L O M B I A Colombia's long-term climate strategy E2050 to comply with the Paris Agreement Partners ofSolS pcSoiorcooicosicos de sd sedeolel p lp rprooroccceeessosoo: E 2 0 5 0 C O L O M B I A Socios dSooecclii oopss rd odecle pel rspoocreosco:eso Process partners long-term climate strategy Colombia term E2050 for comply with the Paris AgreementLong-term climate strategy Colombia term E2050 for comply with the Paris Agreement Coordinating Unit Puntoaparte Publishers E2050 Strategy editorial direction Republic of Colombia Project Manager (Expertise France) Andrés Barragán President of the Republic Morgan Rohel Art Direction Iván Duque Márquez Coordinator (Expertise France) María Paula Leiva Luna Javier Eduardo Mendoza Sabogal Revision of style and spelling Ministry of Foreign Affairs Project Manager (Expertise France) Juan Carlos Rueda Azcuénaga Minister of Foreign Affairs French Development Agency (AFD) Helga Lahmann Martínez Martha Lucía Ramírez Regional Director for the Andean Countries Communications Leader (Expertise France) Cite yourself as: Vice Minister for Multilateral Affairs Nicolás Fornage Zalena Zapata Cure Government of Colombia. (2021). climate strategy Adriana Mejía Hernández Director for Colombia Expert in adaptation and long-term of Colombia E2050 to comply with Economic Affairs tilaterals Climate change specialist Faryde Carlier González Operations Department AFD Andean Countries Regional Office Carlos García Botero ISBN in process Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development Guillaume Meyssonnier Gender expert (Expertise France) Minister of Environment and Sustainable Development Project Manager Carlos Correa Escaf and human development Vice Minister of Environmental Management of the financial Maria Andrea Giraldo (Expertise France) ment for educational or other non-commercial purposes Genny Tathiana Suárez Gómez cial territory without prior authorization from the holders of the Nicolás Galarza Sánchez Expertise France Mitigation Expert (WRI Consultant) copyright Director of Climate Change Department Director of Sandra Bravo Córdoba source. Reproduction of this document is prohibited Alex Saer Saker Sustainable Development (Paris) Support Professional (WRI Consultant) for business purposes. Documents can be Nicolás Chenet Lorena Guerrero Arias download at www.e2050colombia.com National Planning Department Head of the Climate and Territory Unit (Paris) Volunteer support professional (investigadora biente.gov.co CEO Judith Bel associate of Ecologic Institute Berlin financed Alejandra Botero Barco Focal point Expertise France for the Climate Protection initiative of the Institute The MinAmbiente and Expertise France thank Director of sustainable environmental development for the Andean countries (Bogotá) Alexander von Humboldt Germany) AFD Santiago Aparicio Velásquez Murielle Gurtner Natalia Burgos Cuevas project and this publication. Authors University of the Andes Romero - University of the Andes Coordinating Unit ◆ Natalia A. Bernal Quintero - Universidad de los Andes Javier Eduardo Mendoza - Coordinator ◆ Morgan Rohel - Project Manager ◆ Helga Lahmann Martínez - En- los Andes loaded with project ◆ Zalena Zapata Cure - Communications Leader ◆ Diana Carolina Useche - Expert at Expertise France ◆ Iván Darío Valencia - Consultants E2050 adaptation and risk management ◆ Carlos García - Mitigation expert ◆ Sandra Bravo Córdoba - Expert in mitigation ◆ Jessica Pinilla - Gender expert ◆ Lorena Guerrero Arias - Support professional ◆ Genny Technical support Tathiana Suarez G. - Administrative and financial professional ◆ Natalia Burgos - Expert in human mobility ◆ Andrea Acosta - National Environmental Licensing Authority (ANLA) ◆ Martha Liliana Gómez García - Viviana Cerón - Expert in health and climate change National Environmental Licensing Authority (ANLA) ◆ Stefany Borda - National Environmental Licensing Authority (ANLA) ◆ Adrien Vogt-Schilb - Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) ◆ José Manuel Sandoval Committee of experts - Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) ◆ Valentina Saavedra - Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) Hernando José Gómez - Expert in national planning and public policy ◆ Paula Caballero - Expert in te- ◆ Daniela Zuloaga - Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) ◆ Juliana Arciniegas - Ministry of Foreign more international issues related to climate change and the Paris Agreement ◆ José Antonio Ocampo - Former Foreign Affairs ◆ Manuela Ríos - Ministry of Foreign Affairs ◆ Angélica Ospina - Colombian Council expert in public and international finance ◆ Ana María Loboguerrero - Expert in comprehensive rural development ◆ Sustainable Construction ◆ Natalia Arroyave - Colombian Council for Sustainable Construction ◆ Lorena Ángela Andrade - Expert in nature-based solutions ◆ Alejandro Echeverri - Expert in cities and Pupo - Colombian Council for Sustainable Construction ◆ Viviana Cerón - Consultant ◆ Camilo Herrera - urban issues ◆ Helena García - Entrepreneurship expert based on green or sustainable businesses ◆ Jairo DDPLAC2-Regional Center for Energy Studies ◆ Tomás González - DDPLAC2-Regional Center for Energy Bárcenas Sandoval - Expert in territorial/local planning ◆ María Claudia Diazgranados - Expert in energy studies ◆ Jorge Quijano - National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE) ◆ Paola marine Tor Angarita - Climate change science expert ◆ Eduardo Lora - Social issues expert ◆ Andrei - National Planning Department (DNP) ◆ Paola Pulido - National Planning Department (DNP) Romero - Energy expert ◆ Diego A. Peña - National Planning Department (DNP) ◆ Santiago Aparicio - National Department of Planning (DNP) ◆ Alejandro Gómez Cubillos - National Planning Department (DNP) ◆ Alexander Companies and consultants Rodríguez - National Planning Department (DNP) ◆ Andrés Camilo Álvarez Espinosa - Department National Planning Department (DNP) ◆ Carlos Casallas Acero - National Planning Department (DNP) ◆ Caro- Carlos E. Díaz - Brigard Urrutia Lawyers ◆ Guillermo Tejeiro - Brigard Urrutia Lawyers ◆ John Mármol lina Díaz Giraldo - National Planning Department (DNP) ◆ Katherine Leal Guayambuco - Department- - Brigard Urrutia Lawyers ◆ Juana Micán - Brigard Urrutia Lawyers ◆ Victoria Guaqueta - Brigard Urruto National Planning Department (DNP) ◆ Lorena Franco Vidal - Fundación Natura ◆ Natalia Montoya - DDPLAC2- tia Lawyers ◆ Agustín Inthamoussu - CAIA Engineering S.A.S. ◆ Alexander Valencia Cruz - CAIA Engineering HILL ◆ Juan Felipe Méndez - DDPLAC2-HILL ◆ Mónica Espinosa - DDPLAC2-HILL ◆ Magda Sierra - Institute of S.A.S. ◆ Juan Carlos Araque Meza - CAIA Engineering S.A.S. ◆ Liliana Ayala López - CAIA Engineering S.A.S. ◆ Hydrology María Angélica Montes A. - CAIA Engineering S.A.S. ◆ Mario Andrés Hernández - CAIA Engineering S.A.S. ◆ Silvia rology and Environmental Studies (IDEAM) ◆ Constantino Hernández - Institute of Hydrology Susana González M. - CAIA Engineering S.A.S. ◆ Ricardo Arguello - CODS Castro - CODS Delgado - CODS Econometrics ◆ Oscar Rodríguez Nieto - Econometrics ◆ Omar Darío Cardona A. - INGENIAR ◆ Gabriel Andrés Camilo Correa - Alexander von Humboldt Institute ◆ Carolina Castellano - Alexander von Humboldt Institute Bernal G. - INGENIAR ◆ José Daniel Pabón C. - INGENIAR ◆ Mabel Cristina Marulanda F. - INGENIAR ◆ Mar- ◆ María Cecilia Londoño - Alexander von Humboldt Institute ◆ María Piedad Baptiste - Alexander Institute tha Liliana Carreño T. - INGENIAR ◆ Diana Marcela González C. - INGENIAR ◆ Claudia Villegas R. - INGENIAR von Humboldt ◆ José Corredor - National Institute of Health ◆ Carolina Barbanti - National Institute of Roads ◆ Paula Marulanda F. - INGENIAR ◆ Sthefanía Grajales N. - INGENIAR ◆ David Felipe Rincón C. - INGENIAR ◆ (INVÍAS) ◆ Nancy Velásquez - National Institute of Roads (INVÍAS) ◆ Cecilia Medina - Ministry of Agriculture and John Fredy Molina B. - INGENIAR ◆ Ana María Jaramillo - Parque Explora ◆ Andrés López - Parque Explora ◆ Rural Development ◆ Isabel Cárdenas - Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development ◆ Nelson Lozano - Ministry Carolina Alzate Gouzy - Parque Explora ◆ Carolina Sanín - Parque Explora ◆ Juliana Murillo - Parque Explora ◆ Agriculture and Rural Development ◆ Andrea Corzo Álvarez and team from the Directorate of Environmental Affairs Juliana Restrepo - Explora Park ◆ Lina Marcela Cataño B. - Explora Park ◆ Patricia Fernández C. - Sectorial and Urban Park - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Andrés Cortés Caro - Ministry of Am- Explora ◆ Yérica Jiménez Cano - Explora Park ◆ Libardo Fernández - Voices 2030 ◆ Alejandra Cifuentes - Voiente and Sustainable Development ◆ Angie Roncancio - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Cristina ces 2030 ◆ Margarita Mariño de Botero - Voices 2030 ◆ Julie Alejandra Cifuentes G. - Redacrecer Colombia ◆ Libardo Fernández Almanza - Redacrecer ◆ Jairo Gamboa - WWF Colombia ◆ Liliana Gracia Hincapié - WWF Colombia ◆ Luisa Forero - WWF Colombia Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ José Francisco Charry - Ministry of Environment and Development ◆ María Alejandra González - WWF Colombia ◆ María Ximena Barrera - WWF Colombia ◆ Sustainable Carolina Herrera ◆ Adriana Gutiérrez - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Diego Mejía - Ministry of Vargas - GAIA Amazonas Foundation ◆ Juan Carlos Preciado B - GAIA Amazonas Foundation ◆ Paola García Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Néstor Roberto Garzon - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - GAIA Amazonas Foundation ◆ Mateo Estrada - GAIA Amazonas Foundation versity of the Andes - University of the Andes - University of the Andes Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ María del Mar Mozo Muriel and team from the Biodiversity Department Forests and Ecosystem Services - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Fabián Mauricio Trabajo ◆ Juan David Roldán - Ministry of Transport ◆ Alejandra Borda - Ministry of Transport ◆ Magda Caicedo Carrascal and team Comprehensive Management of Water Resources Directorate - Ministry of Environment and Development- Constanza Buitrago - Ministry of Transportation◆ Angélica Patricia Peñuela - Ministry of Housing Sustainable roll ◆ Esteban Neira - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Adriana Zambrano Territory ◆ David Ocampo - Ministry of Housing - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Alexander Figueroa - Ministry of Environment and Housing Development Sustainable ◆ Ángela Rivera - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Angélica Mosquera - Ministry Rincón - Ministry of Housing of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Edwin Ortiz - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Eliana Territorio ◆ July González - Ministry of Housing Hernández - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Erika Amaya - Ministry of Environment and - National Plan for Adaptation to Climate Change (PNACC) ◆ Diego Olarte - UNDP ◆ Claudia Ximena Ramos Sustainable Development ◆ Rosana Romero Angarita - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Jairo Hidalgo - Superintendence of Residential Public Utilities ◆ Daniela Margarita Camelo Olarte - Superin- Cárdenas - Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Luis A. Guerra - Ministry of the Environment and trends in Residential Public Services ◆ Diana Mazorca Guerrero - Superintendency of Services Sustainable Development ◆ Luisa Niño - Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Kirstie López - Ministry of Home Public Services ◆ Natalia Madrid Gallego - Superintendence of Home Public Services ◆ River of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ María Angélica Arenas - Ministry of Environment and Development Juan Pablo Corredor Grajales - Special Administrative Unit for Civil Aeronautics - Aerocivil ◆ Pablo Sustainable ◆ Olga A. Nieto - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Catalina Piedrahita - Ministry Alejandro Giraldo Jiménez - Special Administrative Unit for Civil Aeronautics - Aerocivil ◆ Lina Patricia of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ John Melo - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Carolina Escobar - Mining-Energy Planning Unit (UPME) ◆ Héctor Hernando Herrera - Planning Unit Rivera Garzón - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Catalina Romano Castañeda - Ministry of Mining-Energy Planning (UPME) ◆ Helena Guayara - Mining-Energy Planning Unit (UPME) ◆ Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Martha Carrillo Silva - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development María Clara Pardo - Mining-Energy Planning Unit (UPME) ◆ Richard Vargas - National Unit ◆ Alejandro Gómez - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Luz Adriana López - Ministry for Disaster Risk Management (UNGRD) ◆ Juana Mariño - Environmental Management S.A.S. ◆ Leon Clarke Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Hilda Cristina Mariaca - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ - DDPLAC2-University of Maryland ◆ Thomas B. Wild - DDPLAC2-University of Maryland ◆ Andrés Edward Buitrago - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Jonathan David Sánchez Rippe - WRI Fernando Osorio Arias - National University of Colombia ◆ Andrea Bassi - WRI – New Climate Economy ◆ - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - ECDBCAR ◆ Juan Andrés Casas Monsegny - WRI - Minister- Leonardo Garrido - WRI – New Climate Economy ◆ Mauricio Santos Vega - Universidad de los Andes ◆ Mauri- River of Environment and Sustainable Development - ECDBCAR ◆ Jaime Arturo Jiménez Rojas - WRI - Ministry of cio Felipe Madrigal P - Universidad de los Andes ◆ Lorena Aristizábal Guerra - Presidency of the Republic Environment and Sustainable Development - ECDBCAR ◆ Alexander Rincón Pérez - WRI - Ministry of Environment and Presidential Council for Competitiveness and Public-Private Management ◆ Jorge Quijano - DANE Sustainable Development - ECDBCAR ◆ Blanca Cecilia Medina Petro - WRI - Ministry of Environment and Development Synthesis and National Accounts ◆ Carolina Pinto Soto - MinCIT Sustainable - ECDBCAR ◆ Aura Liliana Rojas Pérez - WRI - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - tivity ◆ Alberto Aparicio - Alexander von Humboldt Institute ◆ Diana Mazorca Guerrero - Superservices ECDBCAR ◆ Diana Lucía Jiménez Buitrago - WRI - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - ECDB- Technical Directorate of Sanitation Management CAR ◆ Ulises Donaldo Patiño Hernández - WRI - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - ECDBCAR ◆ Competitiveness ◆ Helena García - Private Council for Competitiveness ◆ Lorena Lizarazo - Private Council for Oscar Iván Galvis Mora - WRI - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - ECDBCAR ◆ Carlos Saavedra Competitiveness ◆ Johanna Ramos - Private Council of Competitiveness ◆ Indira Porto - Private Council of Muñoz - WRI - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - ECDBCAR ◆ Francisco Javier Sichacá Ávila Competitiveness ◆ Fabián Bernal - Private Council for Competitiveness ◆ Daniel Cifuentes - Private Council for - WRI - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - ECDBCAR ◆ Germán Ricardo Agudelo Ariza - WRI Competitiveness ◆ Ximena Jojoa - Major Government ◆ Laila Faysury Muños Sánchez - Organization of Peoples - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - ECDBCAR ◆ Argiro de Jesús Ramírez Aristizábal - Amazonian Indigenous Ministry (OPIAC) ◆ Julio Erazo - AICO for Pacha Mama ◆ John Jairo Tapie - AICO for Pacha of Science, Technology and Innovation ◆ Arturo Luna - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation ◆ Claudia Mama ◆ Jimena Jacanamejoy - Major Government ◆ Sebastián Hurtado - National Indigenous Organization of Tinjacá - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation ◆ Edith Aloysia Urrego - Ministry of Science Tec- Colombia (ONIC) ◆ Luis Guillermo Izquierdo Mora - Tayrona Indigenous Confederation (CIT) ◆ Felipe Rangel Technology and Innovation ◆ Edith Urrego - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation ◆ Jenny Alarcón Parra Uncacia - National Indigenous Organization of Colombia (ONIC) ◆ Gloria Erazo Garnica - National Organization- - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation ◆ Jorge A. Cano - Ministry of Science, Technology and Indigenous Innovation of Colombia (ONIC) ◆ Alexandra Cuarán Jamioy - Mayor Government vation ◆ Jorge A. Cano - Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation ◆ Edith Urrego - Ministry of Com- that is Romero - Ministry of Finance and Public Credit ◆ Juan Camilo Farfán - Ministry of Finance and Credit ◆ Francisco Cruz Prada - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Carlos Eduardo Correa Escaf - Minis- Public ◆ Laura Marcela Ruiz - Ministry of Finance and Public Credit ◆ Germán Romero - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Nicolás Galarza - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development Finance and Public Credit ◆ Juan Camilo Farfán - Ministry of Finance and Public Credit ◆ Andrés Oli- ◆ Yolanda González - Institute of Hydrology veros - Programa ProNDC - GIZ German Society for International Cooperation GmbH ◆ Patricia Hernández - Instituto de Hidrología Dávila Pinzón - Programa MaPriC - GIZ German Society for International Cooperation GmbH ◆ tuto de Hidrología Johan Sebastián Vanegas Gracia - MaPriC Program - GIZ Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusam- National Disaster Risk Management ◆ Lina Dorado - National Disaster Risk Management Unit- menarbeit GmbH ◆ Diego A. Grajales Campos - Ministry of Mines and Energy ◆ Lina María Castaño Lujan three ◆ Ariel Zambrano - National Disaster Risk Management Unit ◆ Guillermo Valencia - National Unit - Ministry of Mines and Energy ◆ Jimena Gómez Espinosa - Ministry of Mines and Energy ◆ Lina María Ramos Lizcano - Ministry of Mines and Energy ◆ Harold Alfonso Maya Ojeda - Ministry of Mines and Energy ◆ Adaptation ◆ Mayra Alejandra Silva - Adaptation Fund ◆ Aníbal Pérez - Adaptation Fund ◆ Rodolfo Francisco Eliecer Sarmiento Devia - Ministry of Mines and Energy ◆ Diego Moreno - Ministry of Health and Enrique Zea Navarro - Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development ◆ Nelson Lozano - Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development ◆ Blanca Cecilia Medina - Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development ◆ Diego Mesa Puyo - Ministry of Mines and Energy ◆ Diego Grajales - Ministry of Mines and Energy ◆ Oscar Galvis Ministry of Mines and Energy ◆ Ángela María Orozco Gómez - Ministry of Transport ◆ Juan David Roldán - Ministry of Transport ◆ Francisco Sichacá - Ministry of Transport ◆ José Manuel Restrepo - Ministry of Commerce Industry and Tourism ◆ Carlos Arévalo - Ministry of Commerce trade Agudelo - Ministry of Commerce and Territory ◆ José Luis Acero Vergel - Ministry of Housing Housing de Barberi - Ministry of Foreign Affairs ◆ Laura Juliana - Ministry of Foreign Affairs ◆ Manu- ela Ríos - Ministry of Foreign Affairs ◆ Alberto Carrasquilla Barrera - Ministry of Finance and Credit Public ◆ Laura Ruiz - Ministry of Finance and Public Credit ◆ German Romero - Ministry of Finance and Public Credit ◆ Luis Alberto Rodríguez Ospino - National Planning Department ◆ Amparo García Mountain - National Planning Department ◆ Carolina Díaz - National Planning Department ◆ Santiago Aparicio - National Planning Department ◆ Johana Pinzón - National Planning Department ◆ Fernando Ruiz Gómez - Ministry of Health and Social Protection ◆ Diego Moreno Heredia - Ministry of Health and Social Protection ◆ Gerson Bermont - Ministry of Health and Social Protection ◆ Lina Marcela Guerrero - Ministry of Health and Social Protection ◆ Jairo Hernández Márquez - Ministry of Health and Social Protection ◆ Mabel Torres Torres - Ministry of Science of Science Victoria Angulo - Ministry of National Education ◆ Claudia Roberto Shilito - Ministry of National Education ◆ Danit María Torres - Ministry of National Education ◆ Ángel Custodio Cabrera Báez - Ministry of Labor ◆ Camilo Andrés Sarmiento - Ministry of Labor ◆ Juan Andrés Casas - Ministry of Labor ◆ Magali Torres - Department of Social Prosperity ◆ Alejandra Sánchez - Department of Social Prosperity ◆ Mónica Viviana Peinado - Department of Social Prosperity ◆ Manuel Eduardo Castillo - Department of Social Prosperity Social Periity ◆ Davinson Higuera Farfán - NRCOA Ramírez - UPME ◆ Alejandra Gutiérrez López - Corpocaldas – Regional Climate Change Node Coffee Region ◆ Mayor's Office of Medellin ◆ Mayor's Office of Pasto ◆ Mayor's Office of Pereira ◆ Mayor's Office of Pitalito ◆ Mayor's Office of Santiago de Cali ◆ Valentina Joya Barrero - Ministry of Foreign Affairs ◆ Alex Saer Saker - Ministry of Environment and Development- Mayor's Office of Yumbo ◆ District Mayor's Office of Santa Marta ◆ Mayor's Office of Bogotá ◆ Municipal Mayor's Office of Aceve- Sustainable roll ◆ Felipe Castiblanco - Ministry of Foreign Affairs ◆ Fredy Alejandro Gómez - Ministry of ◆ Municipal Mayor's Office of Bolívar Valle ◆ Alianza Bioversity CIAT ◆ Alimentos Cárnicos S.A.S. ◆ Metropolitan Area of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Yobani Salazar Díaz - RAP-E Central Region ◆ Ulises Patiño Hernández - del Valle De Aburrá (AMVA) ◆ ARL Axa Colpatria ◆ Association of Environment and Society ◆ Association of Banking and Ministry of Science Saavedra Muñoz - Ministry of National Education - ECDBCAR ◆ Sandra Bravo - TASCA WRI Project ◆ Olga Carbon Market Lucía Zárate Mantilla - Ministry of National Education ◆ Karen Rico - Ministry of Environment and Development Colombian Flower Exporters Sustainable ◆ Jacobo Carrizales - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development - GGGI ◆ María Alejandra Garzón Eléctrica (ACOLGEN) ◆ Colombian Association of Large Industrial and Commercial Energy Consumers Sánchez - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Daniela Cecilia Villalba R. - Ministry of Environment Asoenergía ◆ Colombian Mining Association (ACM) ◆ Association of Banana Growers of Colombia and Sustainable Development ◆ Gisela Arizabaleta Moreno - South Pacific CC Regional Node ◆ Luis Guillermo Pinilla Ro- Association of Sugarcane Growers of Colombia dríguez - Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ María Fernanda Ortega Hurtado - CC Colombia Regional Node (ANDI) ◆ National Association of Public Services and Communications Companies of Colombia Antioquia ◆ Isabel Cárdenas - Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development ◆ Kiana Valbuena Mejía - Andesco Caribbean Node ◆ National Association of Generating Companies and Insular ◆ Katherine Leal G - National Planning Department ◆ Rosana Romero Angarita - Ministry of Andemos ◆ National Association of Carriers Environment and Sustainable Development ◆ Richard Vargas- UNGRD Aquaculture and Fisheries (AUNAP) ◆ National Environmental Licensing Authority (ANLA) ◆ B ◆ Development Bank of Latin America ◆ Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) ◆ Bancóldex S.A. ◆ Brigard Urrutia Lawyers ◆ C Participating institutions ◆ Ca Soluciones Ambientales S.A.S. ◆ CAIA Engineering S.A.S. ◆ Bogotá Chamber of Commerce (CCB) ◆ Chamber of 2050 Pathways ◆ A ◆ ACI Projects ◆ Adaptation ◆ AFIL Urban Process ◆ French Development Agency Chocó Trade ◆ Green Chamber of Commerce ◆ Canacol Energy ◆ Riohacha Port Authority ◆ CAS ◆ (AFD) ◆ National Hydrocarbons Agency (ANH) ◆ National Infrastructure Agency (ANI) ◆ National Agency- Caldas Hydroelectric Power Plant (CHEC) ◆ Tropical Agricultural and Teaching Center (CATIE) ◆ Research Center Ministry of Mining (ANM) ◆ National Spectrum Agency ◆ Agency for Landscape Management ◆ Agrosavia Sugar Cane Corporation of Colombia Colombian Agricultural Research Ration ◆ Aico por la Pacha Mama ◆ AKT Motos ◆ Mayor's Office of Arauca ◆ ◆ International Center for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) ◆ National Coffee Research Center Mayor of Armenia ◆ Mayor of Baranoa ◆ Colombian Highway Freight Carriers (COLFECAR) ◆ Water Regulation Commission Green Footprint Forest Consulting ◆ I ◆ ICLEI Colombia ◆ Incarsa ◆ Incolmotos Yamaha ◆ Independent ◆ Inge- Potable and Basic Sanitation ◆ Communications Regulation Commission (CRC) ◆ Niar Regulation Commission ◆ Innpulsa ◆ Colombian Agricultural Institute (ICA) ◆ Colombian Institute of Technical Standards and Certification of Energy and Gas (CREG) ◆ Tayrona Indigenous Confederation (CIT) ◆ Colombian Construction Council Sustainable Development (CCCS) ◆ Private Council for Competitiveness International Conservation ◆ Consga S.A.S. ◆ Environmental Comptrollerships of the Pacific ◆ Institute of Marine and Coastal Research General ◆ German Technical Cooperation (GIZ) ◆ Crown ◆ Stockholm Archdiocesan Corporation for Environmental Education (SEI) ◆ Departmental Institute of Culture and Tourism of Cundinamarca ◆ Institute (CARED) ◆ Regional Autonomous Corporation of Boyacá syrups namarca Region of the Plateau for the Defense of the Plateau of Bucaramanga (CDMB) ◆ Regional Autonomous Corporation Conservation of Nature (IUCN) ◆ ISA Intercolombia ◆ J ◆ Bogotá Botanical Garden José Celestino Mutis ◆ K ◆ of the Negro and Nare river basins Saint George Carder ◆ Sucre Regional Autonomous Corporation lena from the Center of Antioquia Regional Autonomous of Tolima Regional Autonomous Region for the Sustainable Development of Chocó science in marine sciences Macarena Corporation for the Sustainable Development of Urabá Integral Energy Solutions Corporation S.A. Western Cundinamarca ◆ Floridablanca Volunteer Firefighters Corps ◆ D ◆ Defense for Transportation Office of the Environment, Government of Magdalena ◆ Organization of Amazonian Indigenous Peoples (OPIAC) Land Cargo Administrative Planning Department Yumbo ◆ National Administrative Department of Statistics Parex Resources ◆ Explora Park ◆ National Natural Parks of Colombia ◆ Natural Heritage ◆ Pazv ◆ (DANE) ◆ Administrative Department for Disaster Prevention and Attention of Antioquia National Planning Department ◆ Despacio.org ◆ General Maritime Directorate (DIMAR) ◆ Duenas ◆ E ◆ Power&Energy ◆ Presidency of the Republic ◆ Probogotá ◆ Proecol ◆ Propacific ◆ Electric Taxis Pilot Project Earth Innovation Institute ◆ Ecoacciones ◆ Ecointegral Ltda ◆ Econometrics ◆ Ecopetrol ◆ Ecorestauracion S.A.S. ◆ cos Bogota ◆ R ◆ RAP-E ◆ Central Region ◆ RARE ◆ Rehobot Environmental Network ◆ Network of Cities as We Go ◆ Ekoreciclart ◆ Embassy of France ◆ Aqueduct and Sewage Company of Bogotá ◆ Red Jods Services Company ◆ Renault ◆ Repsol ◆ S ◆ Salud Casanare ◆ Saludcapital ◆ Saludcauca ◆ Ministry of Mobility of Cali ◆ Public Companies of Santander ◆ Public Companies of Medellin (EPM) ◆ ENEL Colombia ◆ EPA Barranquilla Verde ◆ Atlantic Health Secretariat ◆ Valle del Cauca Health Secretariat ◆ Departmental Health Secretariat Colombian School of Engineering Julio Garavito ◆ Expertise France ◆ F ◆ National Factory of Bodyworks (FA- del Guaviare ◆ Jamundí Municipal Health Secretariat ◆ Cundinamarca Environment Secretariat ◆ Cundinamarca Secretariat NALCA) ◆ FAO Colombia ◆ Colombian Federation of Livestock ipios ◆ Federation of Freight Transporters of Colombia (FEDETRANSCOL) ◆ National Federation of District Planning SENA ◆ Ser Colombia ◆ Colombian Geological Service ◆ SIAA Consultores ◆ Siembre Poultry farmers of Colombia Cereal and Legume Growers Fedepalma ◆ National Federation of Panel Producers Rice ◆ Alexander von Humboldt Foundation AVINA Foundation ◆ Cerros de Bogotá Foundation ◆ Andean Area Foundation ◆ Business Foundation for Rural Agriculture (UPRA) ◆ National Unit for Disaster Risk Management (UNGRD) ◆ Unisalud Development of Yumbo (FEDY) ◆ GAIA Amazonas Foundation ◆ Caribbean Environmental Heritage Foundation ◆ Arauca Foundation ◆ Autonomous University of Manizales ◆ Catholic University of Manizales ◆ University of Antioquia ◆ Mayunka ◆ Natura Foundation ◆ Foundation for Conservation and Sustainable Development (FCDS) ◆ Columbia University Foundation ◆ University of Cundinamarca ◆ University of the Andes ◆ University of Maniza- Sahed ◆ Agrarian University Foundation of Colombia ◆ Geotec Engineering ◆ Urban Management ◆ Girar S.A.S. ◆ Major Government ◆ Global Green Growth Institute (GGGI) ◆ ◆ Universidad del Norte ◆ Universidad del Rosario ◆ Universidad del Valle ◆ Universidad Distrital Francisco José de Government of Amazonas ◆ Government of Antioquia ◆ Government of Boyacá ◆ Government of Caldas ◆ Caldas ◆ EAFIT University ◆ EAN University ◆ El Bosque University ◆ Javeriana University ◆ University Government of Casanare ◆ Government of Cundinamarca ◆ Government of Huila ◆ Government of Norte de Libre ◆ Nueva Granada Military University ◆ National University of Colombia ◆ Pedagogical University and Santander ◆ Government of Risaralda ◆ Government of Santander ◆ Government of Cauca ◆ Government of Tecnológica de Colombia ◆ Santo Tomás University ◆ Sergio Arboleda University ◆ Simón Bolívar University Cesar ◆ Government of Chocó ◆ Government of Magdalena ◆ Government of Quindío ◆ Government of and Atlántico ◆ UNUS S.A.S ◆ UQUE Ambiental ◆ Urrá S.A. ◆ V ◆ Vanti S.A. ◆ Voices 2030 Colombia ◆ W ◆ Valle del Cauca ◆ Gran Colombia Gold ◆ Gran Tierra Energy ◆ Grün Management ◆ Grupo Energía Bogotá (GEB) ◆ Wellbeing Tours ◆ World Resources Institute ◆ WWF Colombia ◆ Z ◆ Zoonosis Presentations Today humanity suffers the consequences of climate change. According to mandate of the Paris Agreement work together to reduce and Although our country only represents 0.6% capture CO emissions and 2 2 limit global temperature rise. a big broadcaster should. we do it with the conviction that our ethics have during my government National Development Pact for Colombia for equity with national planning in a clean growth agenda in Latin America such that Colombia becomes a benchmark and we want to take firm steps to make it so. And the Latin American in the search for alternatives and we will succeed with your support. In this process solutions to the problem of climate change that French that through its cooperation agencies challenges our economies and our society. Setting long-term strategies is essential in financial and technical AFD and Expertise France this process since all our actions helped to advance in the preparation of our As Colombia is one of the countries most exposed to the National Development Plan climate change determination leadership for a true greater that lead to transform the priority realities at the national and global level. revolution of our territorial development model and thus build a country less sowing a new social ethic and strengthening vulnerability to climate change. From today we look at the year 2050 as a port of a true sustainability agenda. Of this arrival in a modern country way conserve by producing the circular economy strategy its kind of Latin America. A) Yes represented in the unrestricted commitment with the ability to adapt and reduce our risks the protection of the Amazon and the moors energy and the expansion of renewable energies to build a coherent low-carbon future of Colombia E2050 to comply with the Agreement not conventional based on the bioeconomy and green business the promotion of clean mobility policies that lead Colombia to be a neutral country our greenhouse gas emissions as a framework for action to build resilience Iván Duque Márquez in its carbon emissions by 2050. 51% by 2030. long-term climate change. President of the RepublicWith the signing and ratification of the Sustainable Development Agreement Paris construction of a new society. The fight 500 institutions contributed to its construction. East common to change our models and ways of is the result of a collaborative and participatory process production and consumption has led us to build pativo. We hear the voices of representatives of low-carbon social and economic trajectories public institutions and with lower territorial risks to the impacts and of the indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities of climate change. For this all public actors we act with the same logic of not increasing 9 stakes and its 48 transformation options that address its causes and vulnerabilities. mark the key issues for Colombia to be a climate resilient country. Colombia's position has been clear significantly the climate ambition to build The formulation of our E2050 has been possible technological paths that support a carbon neutral development national and international actors and the Government and with high adaptability words to the weather. A commitment endorsed in multiple Development (AFD) and Expertise France opportunities by the President of the Republic Ivan Duque Marquez who United Nations Climate in 2019 Colombia would be a carbon neutral country in 2050. Foreign responsible for leading this transformation towards On this path of transformation and construction of climate resilience. of a climate resilient country by 2050 our nationally determined contribution This is the roadmap to a new model (NDC) 51% of our greenhouse gas emissions- opportunities in all sectors and that will be key I give to 2030 adaptation and means of implementation in all the sectors. Hereinafter E2050 articulating your vision This effort must be complemented with actions and bets on public policy instruments such as the Climate Action Act 30% of marine and terrestrial protected areas zero deforestation imo governments and the E2050 long-term strategy. I am proud to present this document to the world- Carlos Eduardo Correa Escaf What we lead from the Ministry of the Environment and the Ministry of the Environment and Sustainable Development CONTENT Literature quoted Action Areas for Page 254 transition to a Colombia resilient: referents of Posts Circumstances Mandate and importance ambition and instruments strategic nationals to have a strategy of the E2050 Page 144 long term Page 46 Page 22 Page 52 6.1 Bets to achieve climate resilience socioecological in Colombia to 2050 Page 145 ◆ 6.2 Relationship between E2050 bets Page 183 3.1 Context and national and international justification ◆ 6.3 Means of implementation to support e for action Page 53 ◆ 3.2 The boosting climate resilience Page 196 climate change in Colombia: behavior expected increase in temperature and pressure cipitation in the mid-21st century Page 56 ◆ 3.3 Greenhouse gas emissions profile greenhouse (GHG) by sector in Colombia Page 65 ◆ 3.4 Colombia climate change risk (period 2040- 2070) Page 75 ◆ 3.5 Evaluation of possible the way to economic effects of the transition to carbon neutrality Page 92 follow for implementation and the update of E2050 Annexes the vision of Bases for construction Colombia Page 242 Page 264 of a resilient future a 2050 climate in Colombia 9.1 Story: “Winds of change: A 7.1 Institutional anchor Page 138 Page 100 tion Page 245 ◆ 7.2 Inclusion of length considerations to approach children (children of term in planning 7.3 Information 4.1 Socio-ecological resilience as a foundation 5.1 Principles Page 249 ◆ 7.4 Pioneering implementation of betting for Colombia Page 265 ◆ 9.2 Relationship for climate action Page 101 ◆ 4.2 Cons- fundamental tas and transformation options of the E2050 Page 250 ◆ 7.5 of support studies prepared for the participatory construction of the Climate Strategy Page 141 Communication and transition management Page 252 construction of the E2050 Page 266 Long-Term E2050 Page 108 ◆ 4.3 The road Colombia towards carbon neutrality Page 111Strategic messages of the E2050 1 for general action 01 By 2050 Colombia aspires become a society and a climate resilient economy carbon neutral and high capacity adaptive in their territories and sectors. 02 To achieve carbon neutrality in Posts 2050 it is necessary to reach the goal of emissions presented in the most recent Colombian NDC. For this strategic that before 2030 national emissions reach their highest level (peak) of the E2050 a declining path. 23E2050 Strategic messages of the E2050 04 Early action (5 years from now) is key to achieving carbon targets neutrality by mid-century. The 03 early action is required for both initiate greenhouse gas mitigation greenhouse to signal the changes that must be achieved in the medium and long term. This signage Compared to the plan and early action are necessary to government economic rehabilitation proper planning and avoid this National before the crisis presented by mode the get caught in the broadcast the COVID-19 pandemic of carbon lock in and reduce the 2021 and 2022 are very similar to the chances of having sunk assets. expected annual loss (EAP) vs. Anticipation is also key prioritized climate threats. identify the sectors that are going to see decreased their activity and to ensure a just transition of the workforce towards new green jobs. 24 25E2050 Strategic messages from E2050 06 05 Usually It is a priority to accompany and generate expected due to climate change (in a options to the private sector RCP 4.5 scenario) is 4.03 trillion anticipate and prevent the risks of pesos. Comparing the PAE with the budget climate transition (linking them nation's general for 2021 with social and environmental risks) that the PAE corresponds to 21.46% of the expenditure related to the possible budgeted for housing Asset depreciation farming resource management (time and money) 07 with new qualifications or technological transformation and potential loss of markets. To achieve climate resilience essential to advance actions necessary to reduce inequalities and socio-economic and educational gaps at the aggregate national level and between regions that significantly increase the vulnerability to climate change. 26 27E2050 Strategic messages from E2050 08 10 Colombia cannot achieve resilience To move towards equal climate working alone. technical support gender all dimensions of and financier of the international community climate action must integrate will be essential to achieve this effort. Gender approach. each territory zo. Collaborative work with countries is different and for that reason neighbors and the region will also allow needs move forward in joint actions that are close gender gaps depend lead to greater climate ambition. of variations and contexts territorial. women and men are important agents of change: 09 Your knowledge is essential to adaptation measures and policies and mitigation and effective is paramount in Exports should be promoted long-term strategies. non traditional trade balance thinking. Strengthening the bioeconomy can be presented as an excellent opportunity for this purpose. 28 29E2050 Strategic messages of the E2050 To achieve carbon neutrality 13 11 Electricity will play a role To comply with what is required by the very important in a future carbon science (1.5 to 2 °C) requires reducing GHG emissions in al must migrate towards electricity around 90% of emissions in all cases in which this energy source of 2015 proportional national absorptions The scenarios of the energy plan (10 %) between cost effective gas emissions and absorptions the electrification of the greenhouse effect (carbon equivalents) matrix is between 18% and 26%. from the year 2050. However of the E2050 be between 40% and 70% of uses 12 ends satisfied with electricity as equipment is incorporated and more efficient processes in all sectors. Natural gas remains in the Carbon neutrality is an effort long-term energy matrix. from all sectors and territories. 30 31E2050 Strategic messages from E2050 14 The electricity sector will have to modernize 15 and dynamize to be in accordance with the future diversification of the basket and assume the challenge of carbon neutrality guarantees the sustainability of assets working. the new expansion It is necessary to explore new should be based primarily on generations of fuels for renewable energy (sun sectors difficult to electrify. For the others) uses than with the available technologies reliability traditional fossil generation today (2021) they cannot be electrified must guarantee its carbon neutrality. such as aviation and transportation The challenge for the electricity sector long distance heavy cargo industry activity levels grow be satisfied with a combination quickly fossil fuel (in addition to the tariff): the synthetic from hydrogen clean generation and sustainable biofuels must ensure transportation and distribution second and third generation. In the and operating mechanisms of the carbon neutrality scenarios more robust and flexible system exploited regulatory modernization. fossils decrease their participation. 32 33E2050 Strategic messages of the E2050 16 To achieve carbon neutrality, envisages that it is necessary to guarantee the 17 2050 almost seven times the electricity consumed in 2015. For this it is necessary for Colombia to work on boost energy efficiency (changes in habits of good practices technological) circular economy countryside charging infrastructure and updated establishes the regulations for the adoption of various types of electric vehicles. 34 35E2050 Strategic messages of the E2050 18 20 In the case of the AFOLU sector, it is necessary In the livestock sector, it is required prevention of deforestation and degradation re a productive reconversion ecosystem giving and the liberation of areas for aut- increase absorptions under different increase the absorptions associated mechanisms such as increased das al sector AFOLU. commercial forest plantations restoration of ecosystems and the implementa- tion of agroforestry and silvopas- 21 toriles 19 The mining sector is a relevant actor for the energy transition The sustainable intensification of being an ally to achieve the goals of agricultural sector is indis- carbon neutrality competitively thinkable to guarantee both tive. The energy transition will require the satisfaction of the demand a greater use of minerals that contribute to food tion of net absorptions. Clean technologies. 36 37E2050 Strategic messages of the E2050 24 22 All actions aimed at Emerging technologies can achieve carbon neutrality and play a very important role in climate resilience in Colombia carbon neutrality scenarios must include transformations in the but its technical and economic availability climate change management models is not confirmed yet. For the above «Make visible the differentiated impact the country will advance in the exploration of that climate change has those alternatives without diminishing the women and men is an element effort in developing options center for the incorporation of more mature. gender approach in the actions of mitigation and adaptation»1. 23 Sectors should be strengthened emission intensive services. In this way cycle through product replacement for services and the creation of new products 1. Idea et al. 2018ª. 38 39E2050 Strategic messages of the E2050 To strengthen adaptability and climate change risk reduction 25 Colombia should reduce the 26 vulnerability of their municipalities and departments to categories under or very low (≤ 0.4) current rating of high (0.88)2; and To achieve climate resilience through should reduce damage and loss 2050 it is essential to stop deformation caused by climate change rest as soon as possible with a comprehensive territorial approach and year that the problem continues multisectoral. very severe impacts on the stability territoriality of the areas where rre and the country in general. The ecosystems natural themes are irreplaceable and They provide a lot of services key ecosystems for well-being human. 2. According to the results of the Third Communication of Climate Change (IDEAM et al. 2017). 40 41E2050 Strategic messages of the E2050 27 28 It is urgent and necessary to accelerate the ecological restoration actions in native ecosystem areas degraded that are terrestrial It is proposed as a strategy of marine adaptation for the country the combination restoration is essential for of measures for threats and sectors try to recover not only the structure analyzed that achieve a benefit of and composition of ecosystems 50% of the maximum possible (in terms of threatened reduction of the PAE). A) Yes key ecosystems to strengthen the measures to reduce the risks from adaptability. floods storm forests and droughts are a strategy of adaptation that achieves a benefit 50% of maximum annual loss expected. This has a cost in value approximate present and indicative of $7,800,000 million pesos/year. 42 43E2050 Strategic messages of the E2050 30 29 The use of agricultural technologies Without considering production for export to the preservation of the health of the soil tion It is essential for the increase of the almost double by 2050. productivity this is required carbon in the sector and sustainability. The of the order of 70% in agricultural productivity intensification of the agricultural sector livestock to ensure that the increase in can follow the imprint of the use of technology the demand for the land does not exceed 30%. ologies that negatively impact the sa- This would allow accommodating new uses of the ludity of soils and encourage emissions soil (for biomass production for of the carbon deposited in them. In the sec- power generation or for fuels agricultural tor liquids) in the order of up to two million perennial species of hectares technologies that increase the entry of agricultural frontier established by the country and carbon to the soil or reduce its loss preserving sufficient areas for development provide the best option to make development of ecological restoration. mitigation in the sector and generate co-benefits trades in terms of higher productivity physics per unit area of nitrogen in the soil and greater capacity retention of water in the soil. 44 45National circumstances 2 EXTENSION (IGAC (DATA Surface extension: 2,070.408 km2 48,258.494 51.2% women Land surface Underwater area: inhabitants. 48.8% men 1,141,748 km2 928,660 km2 Administratively 32 departments and 1,123 municipalities ETHNIC GROUPS (Country Brand Colombia black 4,671,160 personas (DATA STRATEGIC ECOSYSTEMS Indigenous population: 1,905,617 people Glaciers (year 2017) (DANE 36.7 km2 (2017) (IDEAM Roma or Roma population: 2,649 people We stopped (DATA 2,906,137 ha (2013). (MinAmbiente and Humboldt Institute 696 indigenous reservations in 28 departments Wetlands covering 32,022,970 ha 30,781,149 ha (2015) (Florez Area covered by 181 community councils of black communities natural forest (ha) whose territories amount to 5,502,002 ha (Mosquera 60.025.731 (2018) (IDEAM 6 peasant reserve zones that cover Dry forest 851,010 ha (Mosquera 330,545 ha continental ecosystems map and marine 2017 (MinAmbiente Dry Andean forest: 7,545 ha. Indigenous and Afro-descendant communities Basal dry forest: 108,191 ha. in Colombia are holders of territories where Dry base gallery forest: 165,463 ha. 53.4% of natural forests are found Sub-Andean dry forest: 49,346 ha. finding 46.1% in indigenous reservations and 7.3% in collective territories of communities black or Afro-Colombian (IDEAM 2017). Mangroves: 285,049 ha (MinAmbiente Caribbean Coast: 90,169.58 ha. DISTRIBUTION OF THE Pacific Coast: 194,880 ha. Circumstances POPULATION IN THE TERRITORY (DATA PROTECTED NATURAL AREAS 77.1 % (RUNAP 1,343 protected areas - 31,408,466 ha. nationals 7.1% located in populated centers. Terrestrial protected areas: 18,591,285 ha. Marine protected areas: 12,817,181 ha. 15.8% It is located in a scattered rural area. 47E2050 National circumstances ACCESS TO SERVICES LITERACY ECONOMY AND DEVELOPMENT • MYPIMES represent (DATA PUBLIC (MinComercio 2020) 96% of the business fabric Literacy level in women (DATA PIB PER CÁPITA (2019) USD 15.541.2 9.8% of exports Literacy level in men 96.3% Electric energy 95.7% (15 to 24 years old). COMPOSITION OF GDP BY SECTOR 90% of the national productive sector and generate more than (DATA Primary: 13.6% (80% of employment in all of Colombia) Gross service coverage 86.4% Basic education aqueduct of 100% Secondary: 19.1% (MinWork (UNDP Tertiary: 67.3% • As of 2020 there were 76.6% Sewerage EDUCATIONAL LEVELS CONTRIBUTION BY ACTIVITY 10,612 electric vehicles registered in the country: ECONOMIC (2018) (Of economically active population) 5,643 (53%) moped (DATA (DATA 1,726 (16%) car connected natural gas 66.8% THOUSANDS RATE a public network 22.0% with basic primary education. ECONOMIC ACTIVITY MILLIONS GROWTH 1,377 (13%) motorcycle and ANNUAL PESOS (%) 1,866 (18%) other classes 5.8% with basic secondary education. farming 81.6% Garbage collection 35.0% with secondary education. hunting 0.06% of the 16,042,336 vehicles that make up 11.3% with professional or technological education. the national automotive park (RUNT exploitation of 57.617 21.2 mines and quarries 8.7% with a university education. of energy consumption at the national level 22.04 % 43.4% Internet (fixed or mobile) 3.7% postgraduate. Manufacturing industries 109,785 4.5 corresponds to buildings and of the total GHG are generated by the 10.5 % POVERTY RATE Supply of building sector (MinVivienda electricity MULTIDIMENSIONAL (2019) and air conditioning (DATA LIFE EXPECTANCY AT BIRTH Construction 65,509 1.6 17.5% national total. UNEMPLOYMENT RATE 2017 Women 77.1 years Men 70.2 years old 12.3% bedside. Wholesale and wholesale trade (DNP less (DANE 2015-2020)(MinAmbiente GINI INDEX Information and communications 28,070 4.7 17.3% men 23.5% women (2020 GEIH DATA). 50.4 (2018) 5.1% urban financial activities 42.552 8.9 TOTAL HOUSEHOLDS (2018) (World Bank 14.243.223 POVERTY GAP OF more than in 2005 (10,570,899) Real estate activities 85,547 5.6 • 16.7% of the employed population: agriculture sector (DATA 4.7 (2019) (World Bank HEAD OF HOUSEHOLDS (2005 to 2018) scientific and technical The percentage of food insecurity in the country is (DATA from 54.20% 146,959 8.7 environmental services amounted to 155,419 positions. From defending (ANDI 29.9% to 70.1% to these 40.7% 59.3% The probability of not having a livelihood Artistic activities own economic activity by women (27.5%) is entertainment and recreation and 23,192 4.3 women Men almost three times higher than that of men (10.2%). other service activities 48 49E2050 National circumstances COLOMBIA'S ENERGY MATRIX ktep (THOUSANDS OF Energy supply Coal Hydroelectricity Solar / wind TONS OF OIL eq) (UPME 2021a) 1990-2018 - ktoe Natural gas Biomass Comb. liquids Energy demand Coal Oil Derivatives 1990-2018 - ktep Natural Gas Biomass Electricity 45 40 35 35 30 30 25 25 20 20 15 15 10 10 5 5 - - 1.990 1.995 2.000 2.005 2.010 2.015 2.018 1.990 1.995 2.000 2.005 2.010 2.015 2.018 50 51 Mandate and importance of having a long-term strategy 3 3.1 Context and national justification and international for action in 2015 2030 and its 17 Sustainable Development Goals to promote this change (ODS) and the signing of the Paris Agreement on ass 2 the need to «increase the capacity climate change very important political isos to accentuate climate and promote climate resilience and a the shift towards profound transformations and development with low emissions of greenhouse gases necessary that lead to greater well-being in the greenhouse”. To achieve this human economic and environmental variables large and involving all sectors on the one hand the societies. in tune with this Special 1.5°C concluded that it is necessary to join efforts immediately (short term) to start reducing to limit of the average temperature of the planet to only take into account the effects of the increase in temperatures 1.5 °C with respect to the average temperatures (article 3). On the other hand existing in the pre-industrial era (before 1750) given that number of people weather related likely to fall into poverty could be reduced by several hundred million but differentiated and their respective capacities Mandate e by 2050. To achieve this goal that countries achieve as soon as possible rapid and ambitious transitions in sources of funding internationally for these strategies Energy importance and waste management of greenhouse gases (GHG) from there of emissions to achieve a planet with climate cough of climate change to have a neutral long-term strategy for mid-century (2050). climate resilience (UN 53Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy long term ary and other related policies subnational country to comply with the necessary transformations National Planning (DNP) ias. Although the long-term strategies have drawn up the roadmap for the formulation of the a voluntary character context of planning priorities and the Intersectoral Commission on Climate Change long-term development of countries ning a vision and direction for development In that same month future (UNFCCC the Republic These LTS should be considered as instrumental- announced the intention that the country becomes part policy instruments that guide the action of the coalition State to achieve carbon neutrality. at the national level climate change private government avoiding duplicity and concretizing its follow- The widely participatory construction of the lying and measurement other national development actions. Not E2050 however climate science working alone. Technical and financial and technical support financing of the international community will be through the funds of the Facilité 2050. In addition essential to achieve this effort. The work the valuable and permanent support to the process for only very short-term objectives in territories and collaborative with neighboring countries and the region part of strategic allies such as the World sectors that lead to wrong investments It will also allow progress in joint actions Resources Institute (WRI) translate into greater climate ambition. Development Bank (IDB) and the International Era Program. It is essential to articulate the contents in the E2050 they do not constitute goals the United Nations Development Program (UNDP) From the ratification of the Paris Agreement, it allowed the achievement of the objectives set out in and strengthening of the capacities of adaptors —given the thematic breadth in 2017 (Law 1844 of 2017) national cos for the fight against the non-binding change of this— climate of Low Carbon Development (ECDBC) National Adaptation (PNACC) Comprehensive Control of Deforestation and Management all those actions and sectoral ambitions and of the Forests (EICDGB) and the Territorial-territorial Plans towards a common vision. For this and Sectoral Climate Change Management E2050 should be understood as a "document (PIGCC) Appropriate Minds (NAMA) and other instruments of scientific information and governance aligned for the pursuit of climate sustainability such as the Green Growth Policy and the SDGs. do This way saria to promote the desired transformation. from the country Advance in the construction of the path towards 2050 that is coherent and congruent with the Climate resilience requires coherence between efforts under the CBD public and private policies and instruments. and UNCCD 54 55 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy 3.2 The change climate in Colombia expected behavior of the temperature and precipitation mid 21st century Climate change scenarios for Colombia - geographic regions such as the Caribbean and the Amazon bia (2011-2100) elaborated in the framework of the Third can produce reductions in rainfall that National Communication to the UNFCCC (TCCN) (IDEAM reach between 10% and 40% (IDEAM et al. 2015; 2017). et al. 2017) show that the behavior of the average annual temperature towards the middle of the century Complementary to the above XXI (2040-2070) may undergo a gradual increase in more detailed approximation for modeling up to 1.6 °C on average. These increases may be from threats that allow approaching the risk continue until reaching in 2100 the 2.1 °C of prospective increase in 2050 due to climate change in to in continental areas. from the other side expected behavior of sample precipitation as in the case of temperature uniforms in the country towards the middle of the century sectors of the Andean Region Climate change assessments indicate in percentage terms average precipitation of 11% with values as high as 51% in reduction of rainfall and increase 3. The global circulation model HadGEM2-AO (Hadley to at the mean temperature of 5.4 °C in the scenario Center Global Environment Model version 2) turned out to be RCP 8.5 in the long run. The reduction in precipitation more suitable for Colombian conditions itation occurs to a greater extent towards the northeast minimizes differences between historical records and predictions in the largest extension of the territory (that is, in the greater number of stations or points of the grid ra is greater towards the southeast for the RCP scenario of analysis). This model considers the components of 8.5. In the development of threat models troposphere worked exclusively with projections to the periphery no and sea ice. HadGEM2-AO was developed by the Met Office Hadley Center (MOHC) in the United Kingdom. odo 2040-2070 (figures 1 and 2). 56 57 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy Precipitation Figure 1. [%] Maps of percentage change in daily precipitation according to variations of each CPR of the HadGEM2-AO global circulation model Source: (E2050-ENGINEER HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO 2040  2070  2099  2040  2070  2099 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO 2040  2070  2099  2040  2070  2099 RCP 4.5 RCP 4.5 RCP 4.5 RCP 8.5 RCP 8.5 RCP 8.5 58 59Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy Temperature Figure 2. [°C] Maps of absolute change in temperature according to variations of each CPR of the HadGEM2-AO global circulation model Source: (E2050: ENGINE HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO 2040  2070  2099  2040  2070  2099 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 RCP 2.6 HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO HadGEM2-AO 2040  2070  2099  2040  2070  2099 RCP 4.5 RCP 4.5 RCP 4.5 RCP 8.5 RCP 8.5 RCP 8.5 60 61 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy However rivers and sailors sea surface (SST) under the warmest RCP scenario will continue to be the southwestern 2041-2070 6.0: Caribbean and Pacific4 show that in the Caribbean with highs around 30 °C. Source: (INVEMAR et al. 2017). towards 2040 the highest values will be observed in the southern and western sectors RCP 4.5 RCP 4.5 lower than 0.55 °C; while the minors are expected to have the highest increases in SST in the sectors towards the oceanic area adjacent to the cape of La res maritime bordering the southern coast of Chocó and Sailing and off the coasts of Atlántico and Bolívar where increases close to 0.5 °C are expected. smaller increases are expected for the region By 2070, the highest values are expected in those of the Colombian South Pacific. areas surrounding the south coast It is estimated that it may be greater than 1 °C. The less- and towards the southwest of the Pacific basin. On values are expected again for the sector the area of influence of the Panama jet is expected oceanic adjacent to Cabo de La Vela expected increases are close to 0.85 °C. Central Pacific, increases are expected between In the central Caribbean sector and in much of the 0.45 and 0.6 °C Western Caribbean SST is expected to average ral of the department of Valle. These increases increase between 0.9 and 1 °C. will have as consequences values of TSM TSM maximums off the coast of Chocó in the year 2041-2070 2070 30°C By the year 2070, 2040 will continue to manifest. By 2070, it is expected that the greatest increases spatial difference between the northeastern sector and the SST are present in the maritime sector southwestern Colombian Caribbean last the one that continues to present greater mos for its part SST values. By contrast 2°C will appear in the northeast. Finally 2100 high values are expected in the southern part of Panama (between 0.85 and 0.9 °C). Colombian Caribbean coast Gulf of Morrosquillo 28 Try increases up to 1.5 °C. During this time the smallest increases are expected in the area 1 northeastern oceanic In the central and western Caribbean dental (around the archipelago) increases between 1.4 and 1.5 °C 2071-2100 2100 Caribbean community described above will continue manifesting Guajira. The insular area and the central Colombian Caribbean 1 26 4. The details of these projections tions of sea surface temperature (SST) under the 25 nario RCP 4.5: Caribbean and Pacific are available 0.5 in the Final Vulnerability Analysis Technical Report coastal marine in the face of climate change for the country (UNDP Agreement No. 0000040357) of 2017. 62 63 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy 3.3 Emissions profile greenhouse gas greenhouse (GHG) by industry in Colombia In the central sector of the Colombian Pacific between 3 and 4 °N average between 0.95 and 1.1 °C. Taking into account high mountains (IDEAM these increases the lowest values in the area affected by the rains above the 95th percentile and in other jet winds from Panama and will be between 26.5 times of the year and other regions and 28°C. Conversely SST may be detected off the coast to the number of hurricanes that affect Colombia for the period 1990-2014 were 1999 (236,973 Gg of CO in 2014 and 243,188 Gg 2eq chocoanas with maxima around 28.95 °C; Colombian coasts and islands in the Caribbean so 227.8 M t of CO 2eq 2eq 2eq while the rest of the Colombian Pacific coast- direct or indirect (tail blows) (Ortiz 2eq year will present records close to 28 °C. Towards coral burning (WWF 2100 facing the south coast of Chocó and north of the Valle in which there will be near increases susceptibility to desertification of the contiguous area- growing until the year 1998 at 2°C. The lowest values of change in the nental (IDEAM Mean SST are estimated for the South Pacific to the coast of Nariño and in the area of influence of the emissions of the energy module and IPPU increases the gap of opportunities and rights (from 1990 to 35% in 2014. Likewise jet from panama lower than 1.3 °C. In the central Pacific sector tions of a developing country. At this point, 2001 and 2002, there was also a considerable increase in IPPU and waste emissions. Average SST increases are expected between 1.45 and y compared to the risk assessment due to fall in the country's total emissions (from 5.9% 1.6°C The area affected by climatic winds of the Panama jet will be the coldest fluctuating between 27 and 28 °C. The coastal area of Narino 27.5 y 28 °C the Chocó coast with SST that can reach Tivos at 30 ° C (INVEMAR et al. for this reason the risk must be evaluated as that registered since 2000 The main impacts that Colombia comes expected annual loss and see what would imply reduc- growing in the country's total emissions from et al. suffering 64 65 Emissions generated by Emissions generated Total emissions Figure 4. management of forest land by transport absorptions of the Greenhouse Gas Emissions Profile Emissions from forest land Emissions generated by (GHG) of Colombia between 1990-2014 agricultural activities sanitation activities Source: (IDEAM agricultural activities Net emissions mining and energy industries Emissions generated in commercial facilities and Emissions generated in institutional and residences manufacturing industries 250 200 150 M that n And s d And 110  T O n And the d a s d And C O 2e q 50 0 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 -50Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy Millions of growth rate tons Growth Growth annual of CO (%) (%) 2 composite eq 1990 - 2014 2010- 2014 from 1990 to 2014 1990 2010 2014 Emissions generated 113.93 84.21 79.23 -30% -6% -1 forest land Emissions by activities 45.24 54.7 52 15% -5% 0 agricultural Emissions generated in mining industries 14.06 26.66 32.32 130% 21% 3 and energy Emissions generated in 15.40 25.10 27.63 79 % 10 % 2 manufacturing industries Emissions generated 18.95 24.52 28.96 53 % 18 % 1 for transportation Emissions generated das by activities 4.17 9.22 9.82 135% 7% 3 sanitation Emissions generated in commercial facilities 4.55 5.94 7.01 54 % 18 % 1 cial and institutional les and residences Total emissions 216.29 230.36 236.97 10% 3% 0 absorptions of -3.22 -17.15 -15.6 385 % -9 % 6 Forest Land absorptions by activities -3.68 -6.13 -7.06 92% 15% 2 agricultural Total absorptions -6.90 -23.28 -22.66 228% -3% 5 Net emissions (balance 209.1 207.08 214.31 2 % 3 % 0 emissions - removals) 68 69Figure 5. Other provisions 2 % Emissions and removals for the last inventory year (2014) Fuente: IDEA et al. other residential and 4A1a solid waste disposed of in commercial 1% regional fillers 2% 1A4b combustion of fuel other industries bles in residences 2A cio and institutions 2 % 2B1 a 2B7 chemicals in different manufacturing industries 4% 12% 3% Residential Manufacturing industries and construction 4 % Sanitation 1A2 fuel combustion in industries 4% Others in the sector transportation 1% 33 % 3B1aii Management of 3B5bi forest land 1A3b fuel use in ground transportation 11% 12% emissions Transport 236 M t CO 3B1ai bosque natural 2 eq permanent 7% 14 % Others from the mining sector and industries energies 6% of energy 22 % 3B1aiii plantations Agricultural forestry 4% 1A1b and 1A1ciia fuel combustion in refineries and in extraction and processing oil and gas production 3% 3A1 fermentation For the 2014 the UNFCCC (IDEAM 1A1a combustion of fuels In colombia 2 3A2 equivalent manure management 6% das of CO were absorbed by growth of 2 Forest plantations growth of representative crops Others from sector 3C4a of the country (figure 5). agricultural 3 % 3C5e Fermentation enterica -3 2 % 7% forest emissions natural permanent absorptions -22.65 M t CO 11% 2 eq - 6 8 % Use of fuels in ground transportation 25% DeforestationMandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy 3.4 Colombia at high risk for climate change (period 2040-2070) 3.4.1 Probabilistic evaluation of the climate change risk in Colombia (period 2040-2070) The quantification of the problem of disaster risk- multiple social aspects tre is derived from the occurrence of natural hazards —to mention a few— that result in a and its possible modification in the future due to the situation of potentiality of a consequence effects of climate change assets and people and the vulnerability of those of a holistic approach where all exposed items. It's important pointing that although climate change collection of possible future climates it modifies the conditions in which it occurs- together with a holistic approach allows to obtain- ren the losses of risk (base climate) that is neither null nor negligible feasible and whose direct intervention is fundamental as part of an effective adaptation process. An evaluation has been developed for Colombia 5. It should be noted that the approach of the so-called analysis of vulnerability has commonly been directed primarily probabilistic assessment of climate risk that is towards a social characterization of vulnerability based on risk modeling techniques- treating it as a characteristic equivalent to risk and go catastrophic for the quantification of possible not as a condition or predisposition to consequences adverse losses caused on the exposed elements resilience or ability to bounce back cough by the natural occurrence of phenomena the fact that potential physical damage is a must threatening. further 74 75 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy Figure 6. Physical risk Matrix of climatic threats and exposed sectoral elements analyzed in a probabilistic risk assessment for climate change (Ingeniar 2021) The risk modeling developed in This work focuses specifically on the threats and sectors indicated in Figure 6. In this studio Specific loss services: Constructions Agricultural Infrastructure ecosystems • Losses caused by floods hurricanes and landslides on buildings Residential Government Water and sanitation and infrastructure are losses on assets physical. It means that the displayed values are Commercial Education Energy replacement values Floods Industry Health Telecommunications in order to replace the asset lost to the same state it was in initially Transport once the event has occurred or to a minimum state mo equivalent according to its condition of use. They are losses of great magnitude and low frequency. Corn Sacano rice • Losses caused in the agricultural sector droughts are losses in production droughts say of agricultural activity. So damage or detriment to a physical asset decrease in an economic flow. These are Forest low magnitude and high frequency losses. agricultural frontier • Losses resulting from the occurrence of fires of forest fires are losses in flows of plant cover Ecosystem services. They bear a certain resemblance titude with the losses to the agricultural sector difference that the loss amounts are in Residential Government Water and Sanitation generally much larger Commercial Education Energy Relative importance of ecosystem services in different dimensions. They are then per- Industry Health Telecommunications Didas hurricanes of great magnitude and high frequency. Transport As part of the quantification of the risk of disasters incorporating climate change into Red vial principal Colombia gave (PAP) and probable maximum loss (PML) for the following threats and portfolios of Landslides exposure: flood and hurricane under construction tions (housing education and health) and infrastructure (transport 76 77 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy Figure 7. Probable Maximum Loss (PML) curves calculated for all scenarios RCP and all climate threats considered (Ingeniar 2021) 40 35 Flood 30 ) s and 25 n O from 20 P O C 15 ( a Water Of landslides on the main road network It's in the national maize portfolios (white- within which the P co and yellow rainfed (manual and mechanized) and services how the climate will develop in 2050. ecosystems of the country's natural forests. 0 These threats and exposure portfolios 0 500 1 well they are not exhaustive levels of risk facing the country as limes consequence of developmental processes that and the exposure have historically led to the construction of real estate and infrastructure that can be of the existing vulnerability and that may be affected and is expressed in terms of assets and 600 exacerbated by the effect of climate change population. These exhibition bases are made up of in the modification of the patterns of occurrence measured by exposure indicators in terms of hydrometeorological threats. type of buildings and general infrastructure) 500 s the country and the cities n Llaas  PpAérPd idreapsr epsoern dtae seals tpreros P of the simulation of thousands of possible damage susceptibility events that an element has 300 O certain hydrometeorological threats exposed to the occurrence of a certain C ( based on weather conditions resulting in threat intensity at your location. Your defi-da 200 of considering multiple trajectories mundane- tion depends on the type of threat and the type of di r It's greenhouse gas emissions of exposure that is being worked on (INGENIAR 2020). P100 ro to 2050. The PAP can be interpreted as the annual value that should be paid if possible Next annual direct costs of prim- PML curves calculated for all climates 0 500 1 er order of future disasters. (base climate Return period (years) the HadGEM2-AO model and Third scenarios To calculate the PAP, the risk curve was evaluated National Communication IDEAM et al. 2015) with which is nothing more than the PML curve or the respect curve for each threat considered. Climate base A1B (AR4-IPCC) 78 79 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy 40 Landslides 9 35 8 30 ) it's 7 n O 25 P 20 C ( a  4 d 15 r it's 3 P Forest fires 10 2 s) 5 And n O 0 from 0 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000 P  0 500 1 O C Return period (years) ( a d of 40 r It's P Clima base RCP 2 35 30 What's more PML for various return periods) before which can be attributed to climate change 25 Separately for each threat. depending on the emissions scenario considered. 20 Once the risk curves 15 Drought increase in average air temperature Usually 10 briefcase pesos 5 of emissions pathways considered. If the general budget of the nation was revised to isolates the effect of climate change on 2021 values 0 of PAP obtained 0 200 400 600 800 1000 current (ie What) Return period (years) It means that the country today has a budgeted spending level in these areas. If additional- of risk already configured not associated with the change in mind, projected health expenses are included climate CPR 2 base climate 80 81 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy EXPECTED ANNUAL LOSS MAPS However proposed by the National Government as part of the nation's 2021 (4.8 billion pesos). RELATIVE BY DEPARTMENT of the post-COVID economic recovery plan which indicates the annual investments estimated by • The value of the average annual loss (expe- Flood - Basic climate Flood - CPR 2.6 Flood - CPR 4.5 government SITE [%] SITE [%] SITE [%] revival of the country's economy projected amounts for 2021 and 2022 are 4.75 lons). It is important to note that it does not have and 3.91 billion pesos are of the same order of magnitude as the PAP. at the urban level or other infrastructures. This illustrates the severity of disaster risk and the impact of climate change in the country the high relevance of achieving a better model da) due to drought in the two crops considered developmental PAP through effective risk management and agriculture and rural development (1.7 billion). Is adaptation to climate change. It is important to point out that only ta two crops of so many that the country has. Additionally, it was estimated: • The average annual loss value per in- • The average annual loss value due to forest fires is equivalent to 1.17% compared to the damages and hurricanes is equivalent to 7.54% compared to gross capital formation (236.39 billion). Figure 8. Flood risk on buildings and infrastructure Flood - RCP 6 Flood - RCP 8.5 Flood - CC IDEAM SITE [%] SITE [%] SITE [%] Value Results $   2.365.319.220 exposed flood risk (COP Mm) annual loss PLM 250 years PLM 500 years PML 1000 years expected Climate (COP (COP (COP (%) (%) (%) (%) million) million) million) million) Base Climate $356,740 0.15 $12,794,492 0.54 $19,904,642 0.84 $29,583,711 1.25 RCP 2.6 $321.098 0.14 $12.115.212 0.51 $18.449.508 0.78 $28.717.245 1.21 RCP 4.5 $392.809 0.14 $13.494.357 0.57 $21.457.683 0.91 $30.476.434 1.29 RCP 6 $302.902 0.13 $11.765.280 0.50 $17.720.022 0.75 $27.816.009 1.18 0.00 0.61 - 0.80 3.01 - 4.00 7.01 - 10.00 0.01 - 0.20 0.81 - 1.00 4.01 - 5.00 10.01 - 12.00 RCP 8.5 $285.777 0.12 $11.435.932 0.48 $17.033.447 0.72 $26.962.799 1.18 0.21 - 0.40 1.01 - 2.00 5.01 - 6.00 12.01 - 14.00 CC IDEA $374.614 0.16 $13,144,424 0.56 $20.681.162 0.87 $30,030.073 1.27 0.41 - 0.60 2.01 - 3.00 6.01 - 7.00 14.01 - 16.08 82 83 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy ABSOLUTE ANNUAL LOSS MAPS AND RELATIVE BY DEPARTMENT Hurricane - Without climate change Hurricane - With climate change PAE [millions of pesos] PAE [millions of pesos] $ 0 $ 5 - $ 6 $ 21 - $ 40 $ 81 - $ 100 $ 451 - $ 650 $ 1 - $ 2 $ 7 - $ 12 $ 41 - $ 60 $ 101 - $ 200 $ 651 - $ 4.761 $ 3 - $ 4 $ 13 - $ 20 $ 61 - $ 80 $ 201 - $ 450 $ 4.762 - $ 4.807 Figure 9. Hurricane risk on buildings and infrastructure Hurricane - Without climate change / PAE [%] Hurricane - With climate change / PAE [%] Value Results $2.363.136.133 risk per exposed hurricane (COP Mm) annual loss PML 250 years PML 500 years PML 1000 years expected Climate (COP (COP (COP (%) (%) (%) (%) million) million) million) million) Base climate $5.375 0.0023 $306.610 0.013 $486.111 0.021 $701.714 0.030 A1B $5.729  0.0024  $311.911  0.013  $510.061  0.022 $797.566  0.034 (AR4-IPCC) 0.00 0.02 0.03 1.08 1.09 84 85 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy EXPECTED ANNUAL LOSS MAPS RELATIVE PER KILOMETERS OF ROAD Legend [%] Legend [%] Legend [%] Expected annual loss base climate Expected annual loss RCP2.6 Expected annual loss RCP 4.5 Figure 10. Landslide risk on the main road network Value Results $138.923.291 risk due to exposed landslide (COP Mm) annual loss PML 250 years PML 500 years PML 1000 years expected 0 3 - 5 21 - 40 0 6 - 10 41 - 80 0 - 2 9 - 15 61 - 120 Climate 1 6 - 10 41 - 77 1 - 2 11 - 20 81 - 152 3 - 4 16 - 30 121 - 244 (COP (COP (COP (%) (%) (%) (%) 2 11 - 20 3 - 5 21 - 40 5 - 8 31 - 60 million) million) million) million) Legend [%] Legend [%] Legend [%] Climate base $136,274 0.98 $2,250,000 0.54 $19,904,642 0.84 $29,583,711 1.25 Expected annual loss climate base Expected annual loss RCP 8.5 Expected annual loss RCP 8.5 RCP 2.6 $146.018  1.05  $12.115.212 0.51 $18.449.508 0.78 $28.717.245 1.21 RCP 4.5 $187.365  1.35  $13.494.357 0.57 $21.457.683 0.91 $30.476.434 1.29 RCP 6 $117.135  0.84  $11.765.280 0.50 $17.720.022 0.75 $27.816.009 1.18 RCP 8.5 $67.469  0.49  $11.435.932 0.48 $17.033.447 0.72 $26.962.799 1.18 200 IDEA $153,088 1.10 $13,144,424 0.56 $20,681,162 0.87 $30,030,073 1.27 0 11 - 20 81 - 160 0 11 - 20 91 - 180 0 11 - 20 101 - 200 1 - 5 21 - 40 161 - 312 1 - 5 21 - 50 181 - 352 1 - 5 21 - 50 201 - 425 6 - 10 41 - 80 6 - 10 51 - 90 6 - 10 51 - 100 86 87 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy PRODUCTION LOSS MAPS ANNUAL EXPECTED PER DEPARTMENT Complete portfolio - Complete portfolio - Complete portfolio - Base climate / average PAE RCP 2.6 / average PAE RCP 4.5 / average PAE gave [millions of pesos] [millions of pesos] [millions of pesos] Figure 11. Risk due to drought on maize and rainfed rice crops results of drought risk Production $0 $1,501 - $3,500 $10,001 - $30,000 $0 $1,201 - $2,000 $10,001 - $30,000 $0 $1,501 - $3,000 $10,001 - $30,000 Area PAE PML 1000 years exposed $1 - $400 $3,501 - $5,500 $30,001 - $100,000 $1 - $300 $2,001 - $2,500 $30,001 - $100,000 $1 - $900 32,001 - $5,500 $30,001 - $100,000 $401 - $1.500 $5.501 - $10.000 $ 100.001 - $175.123 $301 - $1.200 $2.501 - $10.000 $ 100.001 - $182.299 $901 - $1.500 $5.501 - $10.000 $100.001 - $164.390 Climate (COP (COP (ha)  (%) (%) million) million) million) Full portfolio - RCP6 / PAE Full portfolio - Full portfolio - CC average [millions of pesos] RCP 8.5 / average PAE IDEAM / average PAE [millions of pesos] [millions of pesos] Base Climate $3,540,214 $22,177 0.6% $33,449 0.9% RCP 2.6 $3.552.946  $22.864  0.6%  $36.572  1.0% RCP 4.5 $3.630.690  $19.619  0.5%  $35.229  1.0% 1.206.712 RCP 6 $3.566.200  $22.572  0.6%  $33.788  0.9% RCP 8.5 $3.546.535  $22.889  0.6%  $39.255  1.1% $0 $801 - $1.500 $10.001 - $30.000 $0 $1.500 - 2.500 $10.001 - $30.000 $0 $1.201 - 2.000 $10.001 - $30.000 200 IDEA $3.552,205 $21,949 0.6% $32,617 0.9% $1 - $500 $1.501 - $3.000 $30.001 - $112.000 $1 - $500 $2.501 - $5.000 $30.001 - $74.000 $1 - $500 $2.001 - $5.000 $30.001 - $75.000 $501 - $800 $3.001 - $10.000 $ 112.001 - $178.801 $501 - $1.500 $5.001 - $10.000 $74.001 - $185.903 $501 - $1.200 $5.001 - $10.000 $75.001 - $170.900 88 89 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy MAPS OF PROJECTED CHANGE IN TEMPERATURE AND FOREST AREAS BURNED RCP 2.6 RCP 4.5 RCP 6.0 Figure 12. Forest fire risk on ecosystem services Forest fire risk results Value PAE PML 50 years PML 500 years exposed Climate Change in COP (COP (COP (COP temperature (° C) (%)  (%) (%) RCP 8.5 RCP IDEAM million) million) million) million) 3 Base Climate $2,764,957 0.90 $4,169,253 0.14 $4,837,861 0.16 2.75 2.5 RCP 2.6 $3.057.112   1.00  $4.382.191  0.14  $5.016.534  0.16 2 RCP 4.5 $3.428.349  1.12  $5.962.147   0.19  $7.292.605  0.21 1.75 $3.065.960.374 1.5 RCP 6 $3.174.211  1.12  $5.422.232  0.18  $6.485.870  0.21 1.25 RCP 8.5 $3.953.161  1.29  $5.422.232  0.25  $8.965.065  0.29 1 0.75 CC IDEA $3,147,874 1.03 $5,022,446 0.16 $6.203,504 0.20 0.5 90 91 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy 3.5 Evaluation of possible effects economics of the transition to carbon neutrality Within the framework of the evaluation of the possible effects- restriction on process emissions (PRO) macroeconomic data derived from the scenarios restriction on energy emissions from of decarbonization considered in the intermediate consumption strategy6 (ENE) and restriction on Figure 11 shows the estimated impact on the E2050 Relevant to achieve carbon neutrality, the first three ra constraint scenarios 13 that the most favorable scenarios are PRO and provided by GCAM in the MEG4C ity in 2050 greenhouse and energy consumption in the country. tion of emissions on each of its types gave annual in the long term of 1.6% and second with the best cost ratio (reduction of GDP)-benefit For this, the results of the emissions model were used with respect to the base year 2014. Global  Change  Analysis  Model  (GCAM) generates paths of emissions reductions up to energy intermediate in the country. Specifically unfavorable in terms of their possible impact total emissions of the economy with a minimum by 2050 and energy consumption by the TOT scenario reduces emissions by 90% on the economy final consumers in the country. This set of total ions7 in Colombia in 2050 is negative in the long term (Rojas 2021). should guide public policy in the long term data was used as constraints in the Model of the base scenario Colombian Computable General Equilibrium for 83% of emissions caused by consumption The growth rate of 2% is an assumption of contraction of the mining and energy sector Climate Change (MEG4C) of the Department of energy for 2050 compared to the year of construction of these simulations and differs from the do because the emissions from the exploitation of National Planning Office to determine the base and the PRO scenario reduces 100% of the medium-term fiscal framework rate (MFMP) effects of said trajectories on the economy emissions associated with physicochemical processes since it seeks to guarantee that the restrictions that process emissions Colombian (Rojas 2021). of the production. For your part trace intermediate energy demand Four simulations were elaborated: restriction the objective that by 2050 the economy is full- energy of the MEG4C grow proportionally on the total emissions of the economy (TOT) the demand for electrical energy grows up to the same scale of values. This does not imply that the case they seek agents to internalize 700% compared to the base year (Rojas 2021). growth rate of the Colombian economy the social costs of using energy sources will necessarily be 2% in the long run In the construction of the MEG4C and to harmonize it that 6. Intermediate consumption is understood as the demand for inputs from different sectors. with GCAM values long-term GDP growth of 2% per year 7. Total emissions equal the sum of emissions which does not affect the results in terms of reducing the growth of the economy by 0.65% and private income via production costs of energy end consumption. dynamics or trends caused by shocks. ENY of 4.17% (Rojas 2021). part of the social cost of pollution. 92 93 Figura 13. GDP growth rate by scenarios Source: E2050 5% 0% -5% -10% -15% -20% 5 0 5 0 5 0 5 0 201 202 202 203 203 204 204 205 Note: The MEG4C assumes that the long-term growth rate of the economy is 2%Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy Figure 14. Sectoral participation in the production of the national economy Source: DNP based on (E2050-Universidad de los Andes 100% 90% 80% The mining and energy sector is a main sector fully dedicated to export ) include oil 5 that are exported. By not considering possible impacts- something similar to that with the services sector in the scene- ( to the external demand as a consequence of nario ENE O the energy transition of emissions trading partners is by processes and c And from Colombia remain stable in the ENE8 scenario. This is for the rest of the sectors. supports the good performance of the entire economy relative causes this sector to have a disem- ci a p in terms of economic growth. positive economic performance in the ENE scenario. there A fundamental characteristic of the IT sectors r 40% a The service sector has a very good performance winners in the evaluation carried out is that they are P in all the scenarios evaluated due to intensive work. its intrinsic characteristic of having few emissions 30% ions due to energy consumption and low emissions For the other sectors the change is more vari- of processes in relative terms versus the ado according to the scenario and is closely other sectors. By imposing the restriction on related to the dynamics of production 20% emissions are generated a series of effects and with the type of emissions that determine about prices relative costs of production in the sectors percentage share of the different sectors- 10% affected ENE and comparatively with the scenarios os TOT and base scenario. 0% In terms of employment ENE 2050 TO 2050 BASE 2020 participation in the demand for employment under 8. This model configuration may imply a scenario ENE are those sectors with Scenario and year underestimation of the desirability of this scenario. As a greater participation in the production As a result of public policy, services will have to be prepared energy sector for a transition taking into account 14). It is worth noting that there is no Agriculture Mining and energy Refined Electricity Possible changes in demand from trading partners substantial change in the composition of the market of the country as a consequence of their own policies of Water Construction Industry Services decarbonization employment versus the 2020 baseline scenario. 96 97 Mandate and importance of having E2050 a long-term strategy Figure 15. Four service sectors can be drawn from these results. energy efficiency Sectoral participation in employment Source: DNP based on (E2050-Universidad de los Andes emissions with minimal impact on minimal energy losses and low impact economy under the ENE scenario. Under this environmental scene Base 2020 Base 2050 JAN 2050 member the economy is positive and very close to that of the economy via linkages. Addition- 80 tion of emissions by intermediate consumption of energy efficiency provides an opportunity to energy imposed here resembles growth policies reduction of emissions from carbon pricing or resources and competitive energy prices internalization of externalities 70 carbon cough another economic policy that endogenizes the economic cost in the long term (Girod et al 2017; of emissions in the production functions Vesna and Željko and company profits 60 at the beginning) (Rojas 2021). nature low emissions building The second is the need to diversify the matrix that drives the economy and generates income. energy to obtain electricity. job. Bearing this in mind 50 If the electrification of the economy is sought to be strengthened ing conventional technologies (thermoelectric- have these two characteristics. Additionally tric and large hydroelectric) time that you are forced to reduce consumption these should be potentiated with 40 the productive sectors to the electrical sector for ca in order to decouple them from emissions and that comply with the restriction imposed tively economic growth and reduction country (Rojas 2021). tion of emissions (what happens in the scenario 30 ENY). To avoid this, it is necessary to diversify the energy matrix for obtaining electricity integrating non-conventional renewable energies to guarantee a stable supply and low levels 20 The third is that the country needs to increase its energy efficiency. The energy efficiency ca can be analyzed from the point of view of the 10 energy consumption or since its generation. The efficiency of energy use is related with the impulse of sectors that, due to their structure, cost range are low-emissions or enjoy 0 or implement new technologies that facilitate Agriculture Mining and Refining Electricity Construction Industry Services 9. In other words, the reduction compared to the baseline scenario is as energy have these substitutions 98 99Bases for the construction of a climate resilient future in Colombia 4 4.1 Resilience socioecological as foundation for the climate action Long-term planning to build resilience climate science starts from understanding the territories of Colombia as heterogeneous systems if permanent interaction between people (systems sociocultural10) and nature (biodiversity11 and its ecosystem services12) understand them as socio-ecological systems or socioecosystems (Berkes and Folke 10. The sociocultural system collects all the rules 2009; Virapongse et al. This indivisible relationship between nature and the mythical entities human groups and that have been structured to human culture through history concrete examples such as assessment and management tions that nature gives them we do water and ecosystems socially as integrating elements and biological structural axes (González L. de G. and Cuéllar turators of the territory ity facilitates or limits development. across all levels of organization gene sity in populations they must be seen as the classification pivot unit The main advantage of following an approach to the diversity of ecosystems (Wilson and Peter socioecological for the construction of a future 12. Ecosystem services are defined as the contributions resilient is that it allows to describe and guide direct and indirect tions of biodiversity to well-being take the necessary actions on landscapes human. They can be of three main types of provisioning- Basis for (territories) in a holistic and systemic way Rosnay of the IPBES platform environmental and cultural differences nature's contributions to people (CNP) as them of each of the country's regions and their a concept similar to that of ecosystem services and defined construction inhabitants negative innovative and disruptive solutions that redound people. Many CNPs can be perceived as benefits in the maintenance and improvement of the or prejudices according to the cultural context human well-being. This view overcomes the error of (IPBES of a climate-resilient future in Colombia 101Bases for building a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia attempt to solve complex problems (Stacey 2000) such as climate change simple and compartmentalized tions that analyzed territorially organize and manage the processes, which starts from a general (global) vision of natural and cultural (community and sectoral problems ales) separately and disjointed promoting the sophism that the conservation that guides all local (specific) actions and production are irreconcilable that social gaps are increasing and the importance of developing community actions gender inequality13. The application of an ias or sectoral socio-ecosystemic logic in management that all the actors that have an impact on the supply of ecosystem services a territory carry out their activities in a way that is aware of the importance of contemplating solutions articulated and with sufficient co-responsibility based on nature (NbS)15 as the main to advance your goals contribute to the management of ecosystems. you give in technology challenges like climate change further ca allows us to understand that all food and water actions community and sectoral specific territorial expressions (land uses) The socioecological approach then seeks change (Carpenter et al. find new paths of analysis and management the construction of librio climate resilience routes. Understanding the territories (systems to correct errors and overcome problems some recurring 13. Gender inequalities have implications for a disjointed approach social that respond to climate change. examining gender is which important because women source and guarantee of territorial sustainability children systematically different experiences in relation to the institutional and corporate. benefits with development policies (Denton et tos physical climate change to socially constructed gender roles (GGCA In the process of reaching dynamics of socio-ecological stability it is equivalent to ecological sustainability (Holling 14. According to the PNGIBSE (MinAmbiente Conservation must be understood and managed as a socioecological system popup property with transformability and adaptability preservation actions knowledge and restoration of biodiversity. fundamental attribute that must be developed- necessary to recognize that the territories have evolutionary (Sánchez-Zamora et. al 2016). thigh 15. Nature-based solutions (NbS) are Resilience is defined as the ability that over time actions aimed at protecting sustainably natural or modified ecosystems that face the challenges of society in an effective way to be able to reorganize (with the necessary changes) or configure a certain structure and sector or territory and adaptable you) and benefits of biodiversity (Resolution of the UICN WCC-2016-Res-069) (UICN application of the twelve principles of the ecosystem approach feedback) (Andrade Perez continue to develop (Folke et al. problems related to global environmental change fen et al. of fully included and represented. do their ability to learn and adapt to the functioning 102 103Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia Figure 16. For the construction and strengthening of trajec- then the risk an intrinsic characteristic Holistic approach to long-term socio-ecological resilience (2050). holistic theories of socio-climate resilience of complex systems Source: E2050 adapted from (ADB comprehensive actions that combine the measures to mitigate climate change to adapt and manage properly becomes the guiding and methodological support disaster risk. For this reason Resilience Resilience Colombian physical ecosystem ca will be built in practice Start and maintain carbon neutrality • Planning • Conservation ecosystem rehabilitation. variability and climate change (it is all the territories and sectors to protect or favor communities guide positive transformations in the reali- due to climate change (RCC) • Agrobiodiversidad agrifood production/conservation. • Expansion of investments to reduce Carbon neutrality refers to climatic variables or due to the potential increase- risks due to climate variability and change • Use of biodiversity and as well as disaster risk. greenhouse gas emissions from extreme weather events. According to the ecosystem services such as ro (measured in CO ) which 2eq integral part of the entire strategy • Risk reduction strategies through must become fully balanced with integrated disaster risk management (IDRM)16 to build resilience in nature or green infrastructure. achievable carbon removals due to their reaction time frames communities and the economy. maintaining and increasing carbon stocks no (natural and planted forests) or through technological solutions (CCUS) the country manages to maintain year after year Socio-ecological resilience 2050 and their absorptions (Levin et al. 2015; Levin and Davis 16. Comprehensive disaster risk management (GIRD) is Financing 2019). This concept includes the possibility of a social process aimed at formulating of offsetting sectoral emissions programs with actions carried out by other sectors or for knowledge and risk reduction social resilience between different territories and for disaster management resilience and institutional carbon markets and other instruments that contribute to security economy encourage investment. of people and sustainable development (Law 1523 of 2012) (Congress of Colombia • Focus actions on the dimensions Also foundation • New products and human and social services (actions in favor of ility) is defined as the aptitude that the lays the permanent foundations for adaptation to change funds to support the poor and vulnerable). social actors to strengthen their institutions climate and leverage infrastructure transitions needed to respond to change • Resilient multifaceted solutions empower the system to learn from IDRM and adaptation seek to address the relationship climate and disaster risk. (living place between the threat and a broader context determined by skills at various scales). corrective • Financial management of which threatening events occur disaster risk by country Marcos companies and communities. Gender equality. settle down reduce the vulnerability of communities (Sanchez-Zamora 104 105Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia associated with climate change and reorient to be able to continue developing dose without losing their identity. The changes that shorter-term action (response adequacy) before and when all your actions are always linear oriented by long-term visions (adapt- sometimes gradual tion is the climate transition risk (CTR its acronym in English) defined as the possible depreciation of assets suffered by companies Socio-ecological transitions (TSE) are while facing challenges related to large-scale, non-linear disruptive changes in with access to and management of resources (time- socio-ecological systems that emerge during- po and money) new qualifications initially difficult to move from one dynamic equilibrium to another (Loorbach get on the job market reputation technological training among others (CTR laggards) the opportunities (CTR leaders) derived in an informed and differential manner 17. Socioecological traps refer to situations the transition to a carbon neutral economy in socio-ecological traps17 that create new climate change (IDEAM tions where there is a feedback between processes (DWS and territorial degradation (SRC reverse. For example The fact that the adaptation- 2012) is then highlighted. Social resignation (sometimes confused with carbon neutral sectors social control that prevents the emergence of alter- tion per se will never be achieved there will be destabilizing socioecological factors and events deepens the trap and reduces gender gaps and other social gaps generated by the inability to change sources of support for decreased income from a (crashes or riots) certain resource and the non-existence of alternative sources interdependence between risk management and the TSE approach means that guidance is sought- limited to technological changes or business models you go to income adaptation to climate change will not end the change never and their joint management becomes certain activities must be carried out and multiple constitutive elements of the companies of drivers of biodiversity loss (overexploitation exaggerated transformation of habitats priority to move towards the construction of certain objectives must be met activates cascade effects and delay effects that are only visible at solid capabilities in sectors and territories such that at the end of the process the transformation is achieved medium or long term allow them to face and resist the shocks desired formation. (Moor et al. 106 107E2050 4.2 Construction Figure 17. General diagram of the participation process for the construction of the E2050 in Colombia participatory Source: E2050. climate strategy of long term E2050 Wide workshops Spaces for dialogue call with communities (Final and reg. actors) ethnic (indigenous) 5 1,300 participants national organizations nals and 23 represen- Through a process of wide convocation six women) with extensive and recognized trajectory so many nationally the topics that conform national or international in their topics and mate- maintain this Long-Term Climate Strategy. you laugh This selection was made regardless of race The construction path began with the question- sex ization with society Spaces for dialogue What should Colombia have so that in 2050 civil not necessary - with communities can be considered a resilient territory to All these spaces allowed to define and organized and ethnic (Afro-Colombian climate? The ideas that emerged from this exercise specify the scope and content of each of youth groups Committee of Bianos) 11 organi- 9 regional workshops were grouped into related topics and the stakes and transformation options were reached; expert afro zations 84 a set of bets that were considered to make up this strategy. Throughout 376 participants of participants (13 members the keys that should underpin the trans route - the nineteen months of formulation training. Later topics were worked with inter-institutional groups more than seventy meeting spaces were created where active participation was given between workshops and bilateral meetings or with national and subnational actors represen- interinstitutional expert groups. The situation many of the public sectors CICC: 6 sessions civil society permanent labor men and youth groups and activists climate change in Colombia (figure 17). they will virtually. Due to the high uncertainty ture that includes long-term planning inter-commissions In the case of ethnic communities (indige- term sectoral con- nas and Afro-Colombians) spaces were opened notes and transformation options construction > 100 formal conversation where the highly viable possibilities designed to inter-institutional meetings strategy and the possibility was opened to collect their starting from the information with which we have tutional first impressions a couple of roadmaps for the processes to safely lead Colombia to build subsequent participation that should be followed go a climate resilient society through in the implementation of E2050. These spaces that build a carbon economy services were complemented with a neutral Committee and some sectors and territories with wide of experts led by thirteen professionals (seven men) and will continue to bring climate change. 108Bases for building a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia 4.3 The path Colombian to the carbon neutrality 4.3.1 Contribution nationally determined (NDC Following the guiding principles of using the best information available and try not to setback and progression of ambition bia establishes its mitigation commitment terms of the maximum absolute emissions of the country in 2030 (absolute emissions goal Colombia has formulated its energy vision of for a single year) (Table 1) (Minambiente 2021). long term in the National Energy Plan 2050 (PEN) as part of its derivative commitments Colombia's NDC is fair to the extent that COP21 and the legislation it has adopted responds to the vulnerability of our territory- the strategic lines of mitigation and adaptation river before the impacts of climate change and puts climate change. This vision integrates several on the table the contribution of Colombia as a country in scenarios and marks the trajectory of ambition middle income development. It is also ambitious - in the energy sector for GHG mitigation thus significantly exceeds ours and achieve carbon neutrality by 2050. 2015 emissions reduction goal committing today to a reduction in Colombian emissions to undertake the transition through 176 M t CO. In this way 2eq forcefully to the call of science ced in the IPCC Report of 1.5 °C (IPCC and includes all sectors of our economy (Minambient 2021). These objectives allow the energy sector to co start a decarbonization path that Without the electrification of the economy foreseen in the PEN2050 (UPME 2021a) and in the Energy Matrix and Change in Efficiency Plan Generation Expansion (UPME 2021b) carbon neutrality will have greater difficulties. as in the supply chain (Table 3). 110 111Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia Table 1. Summary of the Colombian NDC Commitment As part of its mitigation goal, Colombia commits to: • Emit a maximum of 169.44 million tons of CO 2eq in 2030 (equivalent to a 51% reduction in emissions regarding the projection of emissions in 2030 in the scenario of reference) and 2030 tending towards carbon neutrality by mid-century. • Establish carbon budgets for the period 2020-2030 no later than 2023. • Reduce black carbon emissions 40% compared to the 2014 level. Table 2. goal type Absolute emissions goal in one year. Strategic objectives of the national energy plan (PEN) Year of deviation from Source: UPME mitigation scenario 2015. about the stage of reference Pillar 1. Security and Objective 1. Allow universal access to energy solutions reliability in the reliable case catering Period of 2020–2030. implementation Objective 2. Diversify the energy matrix. Scope Pillar 2. Mitigation Objective 3. Have a resilient energy system. and coverage Sectors: the mitigation goal includes all sectors of and adaptation to the economy. Greenhouse gases: has coverage of climate change following greenhouse gases CO 2 4 2 6 low GHG emission co. potentials of Pillar 3. Competitiveness Objective 5. Adopt new technologies for global warming For the estimation of emissions from the reference scenario and development efficient use of energy resources. ence and mitigation power values are used- economic of global warming of the fifth Report of the IPCC Objective 6. Promote a competitive market environment tive and the transition to a circular economy. Cooperative Approaches Pillar 4. Knowledge Objective 7. Advance in digitization and use Colombia intends to participate in data innovation approaches in the energy sector. cooperatives under article 6 of the Paris Agreement decisions adopted by the CMA on the matter and with the approach of environmental integrity indicated by the San José Principles. Objective 8. Stimulate research and innovation and strengthen human capital capabilities. 112 113Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia Table 3. The evaluation of these scenarios indicates a trajectory Figure 18. Scenarios of change in the energy matrix and change in efficiency towards the reduction of emissions in all projected Scenario to 2050 energy in all consumption sectors supply contained in the national energy plan (PEN) size. These emissions are summarized below: Source: UPME 2021a Source: UPME 100 Scenario II. Scenario III. Scenario I. Scenario IV. Inflection Modernization Disruption Update Gasification as step Start of 90 In tune with the Innovations for towards the electrification Actual trends. direct to the sector decarbonization of the economy. towards the carbonneu- treality. 80 Import Import + YNC. Geothermal. green hydrogen. 70 gas natural. 2 O FNCER + wind expansion scenario Small reactors FNCER. C 60 of UPME generation. offshore. nuclear. two O C t Phase out plantas  M Biofuels. inefficient. s 50 And n O Improvements in Biogas fuels. Yes liquids. my 40 AND Efficiency in the sector Efficiency in of hydrocarbons. thermal plants. 30 BAT Adoption BAT Adoption BAT Adoption BAT Adoption Colombia 2050. world in 2050. world in 2040. world in 2030. 20 Substitution of firewood for gas in transport Use of hydrogen LPG in the rural sector. mass and industry. in transport. Seniors Accelerated Renewal 10 Changes of shares of the vehicle fleet gas stoves electrical energy with 0 technologies inductively. in the transport. and low emissions. 0 2014 2020 2030 2040 2050 Electrification goals Firewood 0 in the sector current vehicles. country in 2050. PEN PEN PEN PEN upgrade modernization inflection disruption Greater electrification in the sectors carriage and industry. To the formulation of PEN 2050 publication of the draft Expansion Plan (long-term model) (figure 19). The composition Generation and Transmission 2021-2034 Change of luminaires presents the 2050 vision of the expected composition that thermal resources will contribute around in the residential sector. portion of the electricity generation matrix and which is 5% of the total electricity demand. 114 115Figure 19. Liquid Hydro Biomass Wind Cogeneration Composition of electricity generation broken down by source (2020-2050) Wind Off Geothermal Minor Nuclear Gas according to the Colombian Electricity Generation Expansion Plan Solar SolarD Carbón Source: UPME 100% 90% 80% 70% 60% n ó there a p 50% there you r a p % 40% 30% 20% 10% 0% 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 202 202 202 202 202 202 202 202 202 202 203 203 203 203 203 203 203 203 203 203 204 204 204 204 204 204 204 204 204 204 205Bases for E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia is initiating the formulation of the plans of the Andes et al. health and education sectors. five system action: socioeconomics climate At the territorial level of reference are the PIGCCT and other plans of appears as an independent region that inter- subnational management related to change acts with the rest of the world. The demands of climate mitigation measures implementation adjusted to your needs and economical. The satisfaction of these demands capabilities. The territories have shown progress achieved through the combination of productive factors. important in local planning and implementation or international trade. Like the of measures and challenges in formulating measures at the subnational level (Minambica (but are associated with other factors such as entity 2021). To the date PIGCCT comprehensive nature (mitigation and adaptation) and two used to estimate the paths of Córdoba and San Andrés departments deal with deforestation basically consisted of assuming only to the adaptation component. That the land use change sector generates this same way They have a good degree of progress in the process of achieving, together with the emissions of the other sectors. formulate your PIGCCT: Amazonas and Caqueta; Sucre nising the process roadmap to continue and Boyacá, which already has process underway. Only the department remains These scenarios were built from the of Bolívar in specifying the start of their respective combination of possible future evolutions in PIGCCT formulation process. key variables that can impact the effectiveness mitigation. The uncertainties explored 4.3.3 Discharge scenarios can be divided into two groups: on the one hand deep bonization to 2050 the uncertainties in the scenario variables and on the other, the variations in the levels of implementation The strategy further They also advance actions to advance towards the reduction of GHG emissions for each sector carbon neutrality in the country These are mainly in the Comprehensive Climate Change Plans (CICC) (Minambiente 2021). Provide for the main uncertainties that could • GDP growth: a high scenario Climate Change Management Sector June 2021 are published and approved- modify the effectiveness of mitigation in the hori- with average annual growth of 4% and (PIGCCS) and in the Comprehensive Management Plans of the two PIGCCs of the Ministry of Mines and Energy for a period of time considered. Taking into account a moderate scenario with growth of the Territorial Climate Change (PIGCCT) (articles and the Ministry of Housing 7 culture and in the process of finalizing its formula- dynamics in a given sector modify • Population: a high scenario with growth- At the head of the ministries are largely derived from the PIGCCS Specific instruments for each sector that reflect finance in which integration is highlighted were carried out using the Global model both its diagnosis and its lines of action electric mobility technologies 118 119Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia Figure 20. renewable energies and technology costs As explained above carbon capture and storage. of the AFOLU sector agricultural production • Two pathways of climatic impacts- land use cos that are manifested in two scenes. Emissions from agricultural activities- Source: E2050: Universidad de los Andes et al. 2021; IDB 2021. water availability nares. ias are estimated using the GCAM model with the specifications of each scenario. For the This scenario configuration allows exploring emissions associated with deforestation 300 a wide set of possible futures. For example, there were three levels from 2030 (for each plo M1: 250 M t CO ico produce paths that include within them the maximum level of emissions from deforestation 2eq assumptions used for updating that would allow the global emissions study the Colombian NDC. On the other hand 2eq explored different levels of implementation neutrality. the second level 200 of key mitigation actions: that in the update of the Colombian NDC It is presented as a goal to stabilize in 2030 the 169 And 2 2eq • Two scenarios of penetration of deforestation level in 50,000 hectares. OR C non-conventional renewable energies for Finally M power generation (high and low). in the update of the Colombian NDC the country I AND expresses its intention to achieve «zero defor- G •  Nuclear energy n mint from 2040 o unavailable du- o 100 over the entire time horizon. Regarding the emission trajectories of the missiles modeled scenarios • Two paths of improvement in efficiency in- to an emissions space that would allow to take energy in buildings and industry. to Colombia to carbon neutrality that for multiple scenarios it is necessary • Two levels of electrification of mobility. rio achieve additional compensation to those already considered in 2050 (figure 20). In particular 0 • -Two levels of increase in the partic- the scenarios lead to a decarbonization of the ipation of public transport in ac- 90 % with respect to 2015 levels and a 2020 2030 2040 2050 passenger mobility activity. Substantial reduction in GHGs other than CO. 2 These residual emissions must be compensated • Two levels of variation in the cons- das for additional captures. It is important amount of meat within the diet of the highlight that the space of emissions presents- To achieve carbon neutrality Colombians (current path and decrease does include scenarios in which there is cially in two large sectors relative to the current path). carbon capture and storage capture by reforestation and afforestation and use decarbonization that allows to modify that- an economy with low levels of electrification The combination of uncertainties and carbon for fuel production regulatory frameworks levels of implementation of the selection set- zero emissions or for the production of material- ification tion of mitigation actions (which were them. In figure 20 selected in participatory workshops with ions (red) follows baseline emissions behavior in use especially carbon neutrality sector experts) produces a total of 512 of the update of the NDC for 2015 and 2020 of those energy sources such as combustin- a greater percentage of electricity use scenarios that have been analyzed (University and the level defined as a goal in 2030 (169 M t ble fossils of the Andes et al. 2eq 120 121Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia To study decarbonization scenarios to improve energy efficiency from current electricity via GCAM Mitigation scenarios imposing a limit on more catches total greenhouse gas emissions (CCUS dero As a result more than proportional in the CO emissions of the economy within the energy sector 2 with very little variation in CH emissions The interest in this technology has grown signifi- these allow pointing to three important issues to break the growing trend of emissions 4 and NO (Universidad de los Andes et al. 2 IDB 2021). with more than 30 facilities (treatment plants, regulatory changes commercial) announced and projects with • The role of renewable resources. tions already contemplate the magnitude of the changes Although the agricultural and forestry sector is current - an investment of more than 50% compared to what is required by 2050. The latter can be classified as mind the largest source of emissions in the country Mitigation efforts are required in all of CO globally from 40 million tons and third generation 2 the sectors. Any ladas carbon strategy (IEA). in addition neutrality requires that deforestation be controlled mind used in areas such as bioenergy processing both nationally and internationally- ii) give clear signals of climate commitment and adopt early actions conduc- of natural gas or the production of fertilizers to stop emissions growth where CO can be captured at relative cost hydrogen and synthetic liquid fuels compliance on the path to carbon 2 of CO from the energy sector. Stop this crec- tively low. cos produced from green hydrogen—. neutrality proposed in this document. 2 while supply is guaranteed. supply of goods and products to a population However growing requires that energy be generated by co-enabling sources (regulatory and financial) that Colombian energy non-issuers switch as much as possible to new energy technologies based on those sources (for example renewable ity second and third generation energy use is reduced as much as emissions are difficult to reduce. Especially possible through increases in efficiency and Although not yet evaluated consumption patterns (Universidad de los Andes a more important role in the transition et al. an competition for terrain or other challenges Throughout this section it has been mentioned that secondary and are the only group of technologies the emissions generated in a particular sector that contribute in a dual way lar have repercussions on the requirements do emissions in the main sectors of the over other sectors to achieve together- economy in a direct way and removing to the alignment towards carbon neutrality. CO to the balance of emissions that cannot be 2 evade Current technologies allow a reduction to reach "net zero" by 2050 (University of accelerated in the emissions generated in the products Andes et al. tion of electricity not conventional and new clean generation alternatives. What's more it is important to note that it is necessary when consolidating a matrix predominantly 122 123Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia its importance slower over time due to saturation Composition of electricity generation for of the resource. The implementation of energy to achieve carbon neutrality in Colombia solar and wind second and third generation for direct use or production 2500 of synthetic liquids and strategies to manage an electrical network dependent on those intermittent resources. On the other hand essential piece of the puzzle its role in the domestic energy system 2000 also for its current economic importance energy of the country and projected. In this case stria of fossil fuels may depend to a large degree international market and availability and combustion technologies. cost of CCS technologies found currently in development. It was estimated that the trans- The E2050 does not pose the disappearance of the 1500 transportation by road will grow 2.2 times between 2015 fossil fuels and natural gas in J) P and 2050 decarbonized shall be provided for technological opportunities to adapt to the n be public transport systems that grow carbon neutrality. Colombia made the transition to to meet more than 70% of the total demand from gasoline to diesel in the 1980s despite the r And mobility by road by 2050. In addition And 1000 by 2050 64% of the transport systems supply in the country public will need to be powered by natural gas electricity in the 1990s despite voices dad natural gas mix fuels (Universidad de los Andes et al. thermal das with natural gas from 1990 and The E2050 has estimated that the path to the use of coal in the national industry and in the 500 carbon neutrality is configured in the next thermoelectric generation maintained without large composition of the energy matrix between 2020 variations in its physical consumption over the years and 2050 (figure 21). last 30 years. in essence long term lies in the pace of electrification with thermal coal 0 the Colombian economy. Colombia would be much more complex and the role of natural gas would be more important in the next 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050 Expand attention to final energy demand for more than three decades. with a clean energy supply and with many production sources such as electricity an impossible task for an economy such as electricity generation could go through Coal Natural gas Electricity Fossil liquids Biomass and renewable Colombian. If the new demands were met, the decarbonization path would follow (figure 22). 124 125 Coal Gas Liquids Figure 22. Composition in percentage of electricity generation by Others Hydro biomass and cogeneration source for carbon neutrality of Colombia to 2050 renewable Source: E2050: University of Los Andes et al. 2021; IDB 2021. 100% 90% 80% a c ri t c 70% It's the n ó there a r 60% And n And g a n l and 50% And t n And u f r the 40% p n ó there a p us 30% you r a P 20% 10% 0% 2015 2020 2025 2030 2035 2040 2045 2050Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia Comparison of trajectories Figure 23. reduction of emissions Comparison of emissions scenarios PEN and carbon neutrality Source: E2050: University of the Andes et al. The differences between the trajectories proposed by the PEN2050 and the results of the modeling for the 100 carbon neutrality can be seen below: Table 4. Colombia 2 80 73 2014 2020 2030 2040 2050 70 62 64 q 60 Carbon neutrality 73 62 64 35 12 2e O C t M s  50 And n O and me PEN update 73 62 75 82 90 AND 40 35 30 PEN modernization 73 62 71 73 75 20 12 10 PEN inflection 73 62 69 68 69 0 2014 2020 2030 2040 2050 PEN disruption 73 62 59 55 53 PEN PEN PEN PEN Carbono update modernization inflection disruption neutrality 128 129Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia As shown will be achieved with actions that will have their highest to of gas absorptions (EOR impact after 2030 greenhouse effect by 2050 expected technological changes in all that can lead to an emission of 26 g CO ment the carbon neutrality strategy in the 2 processes that use energy. per kWh (IEA mixed 1 g CO per kWh 2 Next decarbonization of electricity generation and the CCUS processes and compensation strategies. not to compensate for eventual emissions that gory no AFOLU is approximately 6 M t/ Occur. for Columbia 2 Figure 24. Viable absorption natives framed in two could be expanded to the total available (17.8 M Trajectory towards carbon neutrality in electricity generation desirable for categories: i) no AFOLU for those alternatives t/year CO) 2 Colombia 2 2 according to the recent version of the Generation Expansion Plan (8 M t CO ) atmosphere 2 Source: E2050: University of the Andes et al. 2 AFOLU for those alternatives that come from landfills if combustion is implemented from natural or inspired sources and that oxyfuel for the generation of energy from prevent degradation and loss of waste ecosystems (WtE Carbon neutrality plus (CAIA Engineering 2021). with a CO capture potential of more than 10 M Electricity generation TWh g CO2/kWh M t CO2 t/year for the three prioritized non-AF2OLU options. The state of the art of absorption options However allowed to identify twelve technological alternatives contemplated in the NDC to 2030 is for categorization in AFOLU 600 16 2 were analyzed and validated through the consultation discounted oxyfuel combustion with experts and were then prioritized 14 employing the analytical hierarchy process (AHP 500 for its acronym in English) 2 two alternatives of capture and storage of presents the storage potential of the 12 carbon —post-combustion CCS and oxyfuel CCS— and prioritized options an alternative capture 400 10 Table 5. Potentcial captures No AFOLU Source: E2050: CAIA Engineering 300 8 6 Emissions Potential of Additional to Potential of 200 A 2050 Available option captures storage NDCs t. CO/year t. CO/year t. CO/year t. CO/year 2 t. CO 2 2 2 2 4 100 CCS postcombustión 17.810.435 5.900.000 5.900.000 5.900.000 2 o THEIR 247.000.000 CCS combustion 0 0 6.096.000 4.695.197 1.435.197 1.435.197 oxyfuel 2015 2020 2030 2040 2050 130 131Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia Table 6. Prioritization of non-AFOLU options It is estimated that by 2017 the 375 EOR projects that Source: E2050: CAIA Engineering operated globally projects were through the ranges between 14-250 USD/t CO 2 CO injection. The production followed by the cost of CO during 2 2 Option Status of development Oil costs of projects EOR operations with a CCUS-EOR EOR-CO is approximately 29-71 USD / t CO 2 2 0.5 million bpd. This volume and finally the transport of Capture and purification costs represent approximately CO from 1.2 USD/t CO at 28 USD 2 of CO vary greatly 20% of the production of / t CO (Yánez 2 2 by point source 18 plants are reported in 60 USD / t CO for streams in turn represents 2% of the different stages of development CO concentrated 3 of them in operation / t CO for power plants than the rest in early state or 2 coal and gas advanced development indicating 100 USD / t CO for benefits In the AFOLU category its entry into operation before 2 punctual small and diluted. end of the decade (2030). for the sector to become a special sink for ecological restoration These developments are ahead of Transportation costs are important GHG emissions. There are 3 types of intersectoral deformity control strategy. mainly in States are in the range of 1.3 of actions related to NbS that provide station Later United CCS to Combustion Kingdom and Netherlands. There I know depending on the location 2 their differences lie in the level of engineering carbon storage in ecosystems identify applications in and the length of the pipeline applied to biodiversity and ecosystems generation sectors (Budinis of energy hydrogen and cement. As soon as Polcher storage cost to the size or capacity of the depends on the type and location of can a better use of existing ecosystems or in the sediments accumulated around the capture systems protected from 350 k t/year to 6 M t/year range from 1.6 to 31.4 USD (2015)/t CO (Global CCS Institute deep (Budinis or restored and type 3: solutions that involve the creation of new ecosystems or their management very intrusive. Since 30% of the national territory is titled to the ethnic peoples indigenous and black cos and 53.4% of the forests It is estimated that the catch of The current state of development CO in a natural cement plant in Colombia (IDEAM 2017) is found they are demonstration plants 2 using tran combustion in these territories mainly in production oxyfuel can be around each one in the AFOLU category will be transcendental of cement. further of 60 dollars per ton the Global CCS Institute has in the absorption of GHG by 2050. of CO captured (Li identified a plant in 2 Macdonald CCS combustion advanced state of development Within each of the types of NbS part oxyfuel for hydrogen production CO storage applied nine alternatives (2025) in the United States and two 2 the same described for CCS analyzed and validated through consultation with plants under construction for post-combustion as experts and were subsequently prioritized power generation from both alternatives belong of waste (WtE to the same group or type in English) in the United States, which prioritized the three protection actions capture and storage (Global CCS Institute carbon dioxide (CCS). such as ecosystem-based adaptation (AbE) (we stopped green and blue structure silvopastoral systems and fore plantations (Eisenberg and Polcher 132 133Bases for the construction of a E2050 climate resilient future in Colombia For each of the options, the algorithm was used. Rhythm MODIS MOD17A3HGF the productivity of forest resources uses satellite data and tele-climate data for its carbon sequestration potential detection to predict primary production to 2050 (PPN) and the gross primary production (PPB) in each one. The ability to reduce emissions spatially and temporally continuous basis of an ecophysico-ecological modeling approach 2 logical. In addition to the reflectance data 586.30 M t CO /year to 2050 2 satellite and weather data biophysical properties of land cover types these alternatives. However three. This algorithm allowed estimating the maximum potential of these measures, it is necessary to discount average NPP (t CO /ha) of the options: i) the contributions of the goals established in the NDC 2 prevention of degradation and loss of para- in order to identify removals or emissions Therefore mo for restoration forest plantations and iv) ecological restoration maximum of 423.47 M t CO /year for the scenario established in the NDC 2 ac at biome level 2 options that contemplate emissions avoided in In scenario one, there was no discount of conservation and restoration tives in permanent ecosystem due to changes in land use forests and mangroves, the average of the NDC stock was used since its contribution is lower than the goal of more than paramos and mangroves. What's more in biome (t CO /ha) while for emissions emissions of the NDC to 2030 (169.44 M t CO ). setting ambitious goals is essential 2 2eq avoided in paramos rates were used for the conservation and restoration of forests carbon in soil from bibliographical references. Namely neutralize the country's expected emissions by 2030 To evaluate the capture potential of the while the third scenario exceeds man- considering its great potential. The above 2030-2050 and combat the direct causes and options identified governments with different levels of intervention on the mitigation measures defined in the growth of emissions to 2050. non-AFOLU category the maximum area identified for each option. It is NDC such as: reduction of deforestation in orienting towards achieving three specific goals say option 2050 and the same rate of (368,836 ha) and ecological restoration (962,615 ha) balance between GHG emissions and absorption was applied in all of them ii) increase technological maturity and reduce absorption according to the average PPN or (Minambient emissions avoided using the promised stock at its closest value in the trajectories second half of the century gave accordingly. Therefore ios represent the effort needed by the country equivalent value in tons of CO reduced from which a combi- sectors can be selected. For your part 2 to achieve carbon neutrality or absorbed targets for each case. further assuming an avoidance absorption or emission rate as part of this exercise ada constant for each of the options accelerated rates of intervention to 2030 for each eliminate. According to the results of the scenes at the national level prioritized. It is important to clarify that he estimates them- one of the options tions carried out assume a constant climate and short-term absorption potential of ecosystems capturing 14.4 to 31.5 M t CO 2eq permanent during the anal-term period hoisted a real scenario as the weather changes ecosystems can also change their defined in the article Ras-based solutions that could limit their implementation. By administrative and legislative to guarantee the operation and its capture potential (CAIA nature that can help cool the plane- example Engineering 2021). ta if we act now (CAIA Engineering 2021). the direct causes that limit its development are the most (CAIA Engineering 2021). 134 135 Tabla 7. PotOLal captures AFOLU Source: E2050: CAIA Engineering Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 Descon- Discount type Option Area Potential Accumulated Accumulated ting Area Accumulated emissions Intervened area Potential 2050 Potential 2050 do NDC intervened 2050 2050 2050 NDC intervened 2050 (ha) (M t CO /year) (M t CO /year) (ha) (M t CO / año) (M t CO) 2 (M t CO) (ha) 2 (M t CO) 2 2 2 2 Prevention of Degradation and loss of 1 forests by Absorptions 707,577 12.5 240.0 2,122,732 37.5 720.0 37.5 4,245,464 75.0 1,439.9 75.0 stock increase in biomass in protected areas Prevention of degradation and loss of paramo Emissions 79.918 0.5 19.1 239.753 0.0 20.9 0 479.507 0 20.9 0 by conversion avoided of use towards 2 grasslands** Prevention of degradation and Absorptions 47,872 0.09 1.7 143,616 0.8 15.0 0.8 478,719 10.5 202.3 10.5 wasteland loss by restoration Prevention of Degradation emissions 3 and loss of 2,172 0.1 1.9 1,689 0.3 5.6 0.3 0 1.0 18.6 1.0 avoided mangroves by deforestation * Systems 4 Absorptions 1,015,558 23.1 409.6 3,046,674 69.2 1,228.8 -20.5 10,155,582 230.8 4,096.0 141.0 silvopastoriles plantations 5 Absorptions 746,751 17.1 324.0 2,240,252 51.2 972.0 43.0 7,467,508 170.6 1,619.3 162.4 forestry Restoration 6 Absorptions 125,599 2.0 45.0 376,797 6.1 135.0 -10.2 1,255,990 20.4 450.0 4.1 ecological *The value presented in area corresponds to an annual deforestation goal. **Emissions avoided for this option (páramos) considers a protection period of 20 years from the moment the intervention begins. Therefore in 2050, a capture potential (avoided emissions) is not reflected because said scenario has been gradually fulfilled in that period (85,084,710) in previous years. However 5 In 2050 Colombia will be a resident country liente al clima be human biodiversity and water security. It will have a competitive economy circular and carbon neutral. As well tions with extensive capabilities for adaptation to climate change achieved from transformations The vision sustainable promoted through a act ethical from Colombia vacation food security and strengthening a 2050 territorial governance. 139E2050 Colombia's vision to 2050 5.1 Principles To achieve this vision, have two main objectives fundamental to guide the paths Colombia should continue to consolidate in 2050 as a climate resilient country: Equity Since all Colombian citizens have the same constitutional rights tion of socio-ecological climate resilience must be based on the generation of equity between the different sectors res and individuals that inhabit this territory. Orientation 1.5 °C Consistent with the overall objective of maintaining the global average temperature rise below 2 °C with respect to prein- Vital priority of the industrial 01 Colombia should have a net balance of zero socio-ecological climate resilience between its emissions and removals of greenhouse gases greenhouse effect (carbon equivalents) to Life is the supreme value and advance actions from the year 2050 reported in 2015. have the capacity to face the challenges associated with two with climate change without having to sacrifice knowledge-based care your well-being. Socioecological resilience is 02 Colombia must reduce the vulnerability of a synonym of sustainability (Berkes its municipalities and departments to categories the regional realities low or very low (≤ 0.4) high current cation (0.88)19 (IDEAM and should reduce the damages and losses caused by experts from various branches of knowledge due to climate change comprehensive and multisectoral. Intersectoral type of policies are seeking to achieve and ensure that 19. According to the Third National Communication of possible trade-offs20 Climate Change (IDEAM and externalities are minimized and taken into account Climate Change (Rcc) oscillates in values from 0 to 1 maximum risk. It also counts in the decisions that are made. opposites (Cambridge Dictionary 140 141E2050 Colombia's vision to 2050 Caution When there is a danger of serious and irreversible harm - mitigation and related means of implementation co-responsibility should be used as a reason to prevent or technology and capacity building) The management for the construction of resilience postpone the adoption of effective measures for as in the adoption of decisions on the appli- climate socioecological is a responsibility to prevent the degradation of the environment (Law cation of climate policies21. i as a guideline of behavior in accordance shared but differentiated between all 99 of 1993; State Council Judgment 25 of which people must act in certain members of society. The distribution of the January 2019 risks and benefits derived from the management must of Colombia be democratic Territorial dimension ii as a criterion of interpretation in the analysis sis of the actions or omissions of individuals Socio-ecological climate resilience is that fundamental rights are violated or threatened. Recognition Coordinating approach inclusion of cultural difference concordance with the planning policies iii as a limit to their own rights (Consid- The development of the long-term vision (2050) The construction of socio-territorial climate resilience and harmony with nature. This initial eras SC-459/04). congruent with the it must be done in a harmonized and articulated ecological way is closely linked to the dimension is also related to the difference constitutional value (art. 1). with the national goals of short (2022) and medium-ethnic and cultural diversity. Recognition no deadline (2030 management practices of the nature of the peoples action alternatives must be adapted to the real- Indigenous and local communities in the design and strategies Adaptable programs Low carbon local transparency and adaptation to change in uncertain scenarios long term climate Submit timely to the different za between the parties to articulate with the policies This plan must consider the degree of uncertainty instances the sufficient information that allows cas of development and ordering of the territory understand the scope information sources and assumptions. This Covered in the Political Constitution of Colomcos. Therefore principle also includes critical analysis for bia recognize data and lessons learned from the processes. based on the fundamental principle decentralization gender equality covering for its management the four types that The Conference of the Parties sessions 36/CP.7 Well-being of the population and the and 21/CP.22 and the Paris Agreement improvement of their quality of life resolution of the General Assembly on the Agen- With the advancement of knowledge and information 2030 for Sustainable Development observes available information it is necessary that the monitoring The quality of life of the population is reciprocal that it is still necessary to reinforce the response ment of the goals derived from the E2050 is and inextricably related to the construction of climate policy to gender issues based on quantitative indicators that allow- 21. Improved version of the Lima Work Program and its tion of socio-ecological climate resilience. in all activities related to adaptation 142 143 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia resilient: referents of ambition and instruments 6 The climate resilience of Colombia to 2050 se et al. will build through the comprehensive development of climate change risk assessment ambitious and disruptive actions that allow (RCC) (Engineering significantly decarbonize the economy. main phases (Herrfahrdt-Pähle et al. It seeks to reach levels that are congruent Folke with that required by science to contribute decades (Loorbach effective way to achieve the goal global keep the global temperature below tion of socio-ecological climate resilience of 2 °C (ideally 1.5 °C). Transitions need to consider all stakes socio-ecological (TSE) necessary to achieve that as interrelated Colombia has gone from being an intense carbon country tive and highly vulnerable to climate change- carry sectoral and more specific processes co (IDEA a carbon neutral country with high activation capacities of each one based on the others. of adaptation national and regional planning with a systemic vision- gender and actions for risk management ca and territorial approach so that these transitions transformation options materialize in that transformations of concrete realities. adaptation capacity strengthened for the long term emerge as emergent properties of the system Given the enormous uncertainty and complexity ma thanks to the virtuous cycles created. which implies long-term projection (≥30 Areas of years) of complex systems ture through bets seek to develop the great TSE towards a resilient country- also from strengthening the processes of mind the weather. The transformation towards carbon-participation and governance that recognize the non-neutrality is initially guided by the importance of the different systems of knowledge action for national GHG inventories (INGEI) (IDEAM to the. mined (NDC) (MinAmbiente they present the activities and strategic sectors at the national level. in addition the transition that concentrate the largest GHG emissions participation and governance recognize that of the country and the greatest opportunities for miti- men cation. On the other hand increase the adaptive capacity is oriented needs to a resilient Colombia: benchmarks of ambition and instruments ta in the Third National Communication (IDEAM 145Figure 25. General conceptual diagram of the phases of the socio-ecological transition TRANSFORMATION PHASE (TSE) for long-term climate resilience (2050) in Colombia MULTIDIMENSIONAL Source: E2050 INCREASE PHASE CONSOLIDATION PHASE OF A SIGNIFICANCE OF THE CLIMATE RESILIENT FUTURE AMBITION Policies and media of implementation to to advance n o Windows significantly ACI Opportunity in transformation N Compliance with national inter- Consolidated macrostructural changes sectoral (long-term rescaling). Articulation between policy instruments. Low carbon economy (reduc- Compliance s New NDCs in significant trajectory of GHG emissions O c NDC: -51% decarbonization and increase in carbon stocks) give ó ol Significant capacity building c and Compliance o Adaptability capabilities or ODS o Inspire and guide Nurture and sustain strengthened s s experimentation with adjustments to regulations and in territories and sectors a m subnational scales national guidelines Management and al t t future for him s n yes and maintenance o m Social and inter- institutional m a of resilience agreements innovative co art for climate management dos Dep Programs a treergriiotonraial lq cuoen o prliaennitfiac laacs ion stoodcaiose lcaosl óesgcicaala as to median esca- Emergence of joint n local actions (miti- or the (mitigation and between intersecting actions) ti cation and adaptation) s adaptation) torial and interterritorial And g (mitigation and adaptation) s O ri O rit Break Corresponding territorial management r Te de traps able and articulated between actors sectoral and community socio-ecological to the p there ni u M Emergence of collaboration Positive transformation of realities Isolated projects to tions small-scale (mutual miti- between projects tion and adaptation) (mitigation and adaptation) 2020 2030 2040 2050 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Table 8. Overview of the three phases of the socio-ecological transition Multidimensional transformation phase (2030–2040) (TSE) for long-term climate resilience (2050) in Colombia Source: E2050 In this phase, the main actions that must give continuity to the policies initiated in the previous decade Phase of significant increase in ambition (2020–2030) significantly in the desired transformation towards carbon neutrality and the increase of adaptability. The new post-2030 NDCs must continue to increase ambition in line with the projected decarbonization routes and the new goals of adaptation. It will be a priority to build local action processes that transform realities It is characterized by a significant intersectoral effort that allows reaching the goals articulated and oriented from a regional planning contained in various policy instruments horizon to 2025 and 2020 with a horizon to 2030 —148 goals—) Developing In this phase advancing the foundations for building long-term climate resilience (2050). climate transition (CTR) continue to be key to reaffirm new processes The development of climate change actions and projects (mitigation22 started in the previous phase and risk management) GEI coordination between initiatives of the population practices and lessons learned in productivity towards carbon neutrality and increased adaptive capacity It is important to note that participation is increased will allow for deeper transformations in the social and intersectoral system significant capacity building and technical and financial support Colombia and close gaps on the way to achieve/secure carbon neutrality. to public actors differentiated impacts and technological needs and implications of means of implementation necessary for long-term climate resilience. These accompaniments will be key in climate transition risk management Consolidation phase of a climate-resilient future (2040–2050) (CTR What's more institutional and policy instruments (economic and non-economic) to accompany and provide initial guarantees to investors spare parts and adjustments that will be necessary At this stage it will also be crucial as soon as possible construction of climate resilience by the supply of key ecosystem services for the minimum level of change necessary for the proposed climate resilience vision ensure human well-being sources of GHG emissions in the country. This phase will also be crucial for the start of the process and give legal certainty to the national and subnational transformation processes. fuel transition natural gas above other fossil fuels and starting the biofuel step of the climate transition from first generation to second and third generation biofuels24. will continue to pave the way for new and permanent adaptation needs that risk will never go away and adaptation is not a goal to be achieved what 22. Mitigation of greenhouse gases: it is the management that seeks to reduce the levels of emissions of greenhouse gases. to greenhouse in the atmosphere through the limitation or reduction of the sources of GHG emissions and the increase or improvement of GHG sinks and reserves. For purposes of this law programs Low Carbon and the National REDD+ Strategy (ENREDD+) (Law 1931 of 2018) (Congress of Colombia 24. Conventional biofuels 23. Adaptation to climate change: is the process of adjustment to the present and expected effects of climate change. On farmland. from the other side social areas of decision corresponds to the adjustment process that seeks to mitigate the harmful effects or take advantage of the paths of plant materials (woody crops present or expected beneficial opportunities from the climate and its effects. in socioecosystems biodiversity to the current climate and its effects can be intervened by society in order to facilitate adjustment to the climate generation are extracted from algae with a natural oil content of at least 50%. The production of the expected (Law 1931 of 2018) (Congress of Colombia 148 149Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments 6.1 Bets for achieve resilience socioecological climate in Colombia by 2050 READING THE FILES OF INITIATIVES bet number bet icon bet title (GCAM-RDM and TIMES) following the technique of Given the breadth of topics temporary zone and its aspirational and non-co (MEG4C) and risk character due to climate change binding Option number The training is accompanied by references to the national goals established for 2030 and of transformation of ambition reach 2050 transformation option actions that the country will subsequently carry out Next in the construction of their paths towards resili- bets and transformation options that climate science. These referents do not constitute the development with those lines of action Binding goals neither for sectors nor for strategies and some non-binding benchmarks referents of ambition the territories to 2050 (changes of the minimum change necessary to achieve the to build a society and an economy minimum required) climate resilience (carbon neutrality and high climate resilient adaptability) from various sources: i) the projections obtained sectors to reduce the risks associated with the of models and climate change decarbonisation scenarios. 150 151 Action areas for the transition to a Colombia resilient: referents of ambition and instruments climate CT&I technology collaboration between companies bet 1 novation inclusively c. Between 80% and 100% of companies public and private have created the environments enablers for continuous innovation or- organization that increases competitiveness Expand and strengthen the creation processes and proper territorial management to reduce of climate knowledge as an element of GHG emissions (with the support of organizations validation and verification of greenhouse gases strategy that supports decision-making greenhouse (OVVGEI) and increase reliability ity in the measurement and monitoring of emissions decisions ions) or increase adaptability. local governance d. Between 80% and 100% of the original shares optimize territorial management more community climate monitoring mechanisms to strengthen capacities social and productive transformation. to obtain local and installed climatic information from men and women in the transition guide adaptation to climate change. and management of new technologies special transformation paths for characters older adult women belonging to towns 02 indigenous and Afro-Colombian communities. Disruptive innovation from and. Colombia ensures minimum representation push for science 01 of 50% of women on the stages for the and other knowledge systems c. A consolidated climate observatory to support and guide the trans- Climate monitoring and transformation framework of the National Climate System and articulated that contribute to reduce GHG emissions territorial position digital information of national data with internal consistency demonstrated- of total intersectoral credibility for equitable and productive institutional decision- reliable and high precision and private) that develops and puts at the service of bianas have incorporated technological transformations basis for decision making and all colombian data of policy making cators and early warnings for sectors and terri- tion to the new climatic conditions of the and sustainable. to. 100% of the country with indoor network coverage hydrometeorological training (on land and satellite- the participation and leadership of men and women. ity and proper territorial management. such) and articulated intersectoral and territorial climate 03 structurally to the planning processes and d. Between 80% and 100% of the companies incorporated b. Between 80% and 100% of large companies management and that contribute to mitigation and adaptation in their planning, assess the costs of dams and at least between 60% and 80% of Education tion of men and women to climate change. associated with the risks of climate transition from the application of climate knowledge. technological strengthen the capacities of all b. 100% of the ministries with CIOs that com- ments that contribute to reducing emissions the communities and actors involved depart rooted in national transformation sectors of climate information in Colombia. agricultural producers implement systems of people 153Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments towards climate resilience promote social inclusion ciliation and gender equality d. Between 80% and 100% of the population lombiana is considered informed and sensitized- b. Consolidation of information systems d. Consolidation of the so-called network to. 100% of educational institutions teach about climate change and its effects. mation that articulate knowledge in- Technical Assistance Network for Diagnosis university and technical level of the country offer around the risk of the different sectors and level the participation of men and women e. Between 80% and 100% of research centers people and territories (example ers in programs that respond to the nega- tion and thought Vast differential needs of strengthened markets for the generation of knowledge c. Identification and analysis of information that associated with the transformation pro- on climate change at the national and regional levels. allows the creation of effective measures and the e. Technical strengthening of between 90% and inductive for carbon neutrality and fort- design of protocols and care routes with en- 100% of the community councils by muni- learning of adaptation capacities differential focus for the attention and response to the principies in the management of local climate change 04 in territories and sectors to climate change and effects caused to vulnerable populations. led by women and men who count extreme weather events. Increased knowledge for comprehensive capabilities for managing the local climate change and for the articulation support risk management by changing 05 b. 100% of the pensum of the institutions with regional and national entities. bioclimate and thus reduce damage educational tutions of basic primary and se- Empowerment and societal governance and infrastructure losses secondary make up the dimension of change f. Thirty-two departments participating participatory process for the management vital (housing climate comprehensive climate change and promoting gender equality. schools and hospitals) conclusive basic vices (water and energy) ro and knowledge-based c. The agricultural extension will reach between the telecommunications and in the infrastructure and of people belonging to commu- 80% and 100% of the areas of the country energy and transport structures validation processes of ancestral practices a. The flow of knowledge from sustainable and will be a key link for im- a. Climate monitoring systems and alerts climate observatory and research centers plementation and sustainability of early landscapes with participation and leadership of tigation and thought towards relevant actors sustainable and agri-food systems local communities and functioning between the territorial management for the reduction adaptive and low in GHG emissions. 80% and 100% of the country's municipalities. of GHG and capacity building long-term adaptive is received by the communities according to their needs specific and differential characteristics between 80% and 100% of the country's municipalities. b. The flow of resources from budget public posts towards the relevant actors of the territorial management for the reduction of GHG and the reduction of gender gaps related to das with climate change and the strengthening of the long-term adaptive capacity in ter- tory and sectors reaches the communities in between 80% and 100% of the country's municipalities. c. Between 70% and 100% of agricultural producers livestock with access to agroclimatic information promoting equal access for women men and other vulnerable populations. 154 155Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia resilient: referents of ambition and instruments bet 2 nature to reduce vulnerability in between 40% and 60% of the most ex- to threats linked to the climate and the oceans. d. Reduction of critical status and at risk of Comprehensive management of biodiversity and its coastal marine ecosystems with the base line given by the Red Book of eco- ecosystem services as the basis of coastal marine systems in Colombia (2020). climate resilience for well-being and. Restoration of between 60% and 90% of coastal wetlands that are key to the conservation group of Colombians. vation (for example: Ciénaga Grande de Santa March lorquin reduce their impacts by at least 70 % and 90 % of priority sites for adaptation- 08 tion extreme weather events and areas Comprehensive water management for important for GHG mitigation. future water security 06 ra of all Colombians 07 Socio-ecological transition towards sustainable (among them multifunctional cultural landscapes good practices) reduce deforestation and degradation more marine erased by women of ecosystems pesinas ecological activity and avoid collapse delimited moors and guarantee the connectivity of natural and sociocultural systems c. Ecological restoration of ecosystems to climate change minus 1,300,000 hectares go (according to the Red Book of glares ecosystems throughout the national territory. water regulation in the face of climate change. to. Landscapes positively transformed for terrestrials of Colombia) in areas to favor the guarantee the supply of ecosystem services with ecological connectivity and the supply of eco-b services. The marine corridors of the southwestern Caribbean c. 100% implementation of the Strategic Plans in order to reduce climate and systemic risk (erosion control tar removals and storage of GHG. AC greenhouse gas b. Reduction of vulnerability through the ecosystem services of capture and al- maintain zero deforestation and no degradation d. Reduction of between 70% and 90% in the rate of carbon storage. d. Conservation of water supply basins preservation of native ecosystems (minimum of new introductions of exotic species aqueducts of all the municipalities of the country 4,250,000 hectares approximately). At the same time 50% of natural forests will be under management invasive alien species in order to eliminate or systems are part of solutions based on climate and extreme weather events. 157E2050 bet 3 Production and consumption sustainable for an economy innovative and inclusive. at least 5% of them are in- included in recovery/reintroduction programs Introduction and restoration (Meta ENCP). 09 National Conservation System c. Information on 30% of species of ex situ25 strengthened and articulated- wildlife (exotic and native) in initiatives 10 ex situ conservation with relevant information do with the agricultural sector on zoonotic and epidemiological aspects Circular economy cos (biosurveillance) as early warnings. go business opportunities to. former National Conservation System new jobs consolidated site to house all the es- d. Conservation of genetic diversity of 50% eration of waste and emissions • 50% of textile material. species threatened by climate change. of cultivated plant species and their relatives. of GHG and that allows having • 50% of cement and concrete. wild animals and wildlife in breeding processes b. Ex situ conservation of at least 90% in captivity of wildlife species threatened by climate change and genetic improvement and incorporated into systems • 90% steel. extreme weather bios • 40-50% glass. them and waste assessment and. Log information from • 40-50% wood. ex situ collections 25. Ex situ is defined as the conditions under which wildlife species individuals are spatially constrained with respect to to their natural spatial patterns or those of their progeny they are deprived of many of their extreme natural ecological processes entered into GBIF and waste. This includes industrial materials and mining of strategic minerals from the and are managed to some degree by humans. On sequences of 50% of the species of plan- mass consumption products essence cial under different selection pressures than those of the tas natural conditions in a natural habitat (IUCN 2014) food and agriculture 158Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments 2. Strengthen research capabilities concept of circular economy in the sector entation of its business models and the tigation mining is linked to the mining scheme inclusion of complementary services. economy and facilitate collaboration and circular climate-smart whose objective is in- transfer of knowledge and technologies from chambers of commerce Integrate GHG mitigation measures (inclusion 3. Replacement of products by ser- ations of renewable energies in the sector forms of extraction based on innovation new business models development and innovation in bioeconomy with a differential approach and sustainability and energy efficiency through the promotion of STEM careers new regulations in force entire value chain) bio-climatic (using solutions based on mitigating the replacement of products for services) in nature and Forest-Smart Mining with the (for example in order to reduce the impacts of the activity). sale of machinery) shared use platforms (cars and bikes- certified laboratories and the protection of strategies should take into account the approach 2. Ecodesign and greater rental durability ity of goods and services shared office spaces research and innovation processes. to the bioeconomy to. Drive innovation towards green in- 4. Information and monitoring designs will have increased significantly teligentes reuse or recycling of products that con- diversity and improvements in competitiveness encourage the use of recycled materials of biomaterials or other materials with less Circular Economy led by DANE impact throughout its life cycle the industrial and construction sectors. information for the monitoring and evaluation of riculture advances in circular economy in bioenergy). These programs should be accompanied by political b. Promote product design the four axes of this transformation option. technical assistance programs and promotion of technical assistance of greater durability support to the private sector for the reori- for the transfer/application of technologies. must take into account the specifics 11 in addition Bioeconomy and business biodiversity or cultural knowledge in areas should result in the expansion of the lines rural and jointly with the tourist communities in which the country could be especially green for the use (natives sustainable development of biodiversity among others) and respecting their culture and sustainability: United by Nature). in 2050 and its ecosystem services customs. To 2050 20% of the gross domestic product (GDP) of the country. as a destination for sustainable tourism 1. Strengthening of scientific and nature capacities and ecotourism. institutions for the bioeconomy b. Define a baseline and for monitoring how the development of the bioeconomy affects b. Increase the training offer to. Strengthen the capacities of entities for biodiversity. The permit to work in ecotourism should be characterized of the national and territorial order (departmental usable element and municipal) for a better understanding of its use affects (positive and negative) the active participation of communities concept of bioeconomy and the potential to actively) its natural and social environment. particularly of women its development in the country. This accompanied by the use of new technologies. capacity development and strengthening for 4. Capacity building the formulation and implementation of projects for green businesses c. The ecotourism related to the bioeconomy (scientific project is done hand in hand with the communities research cough that promote business development). for new business models in the economy of indigenous and Afro-descendant communities. 160 161 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments 6. Agriculture development sustainable and precision 13 to. Strengthen capacities in the agro-territorial sector livestock for the adoption of best sustainability practices in its acquisition processes. Integrated sustainable lifestyles Climate Smart Agriculture for adaptation two to feeding decisions to climate change living place precision technologies for agriculture. That of the State on criteria of sustainability and of consumption that generate dynamics capacity building for CPS adoption long-term sustainable best practices and technology will take into account adapting to the new demand. In 2050 there will be facilities for its adoption (financing knowledge) rial and will value knowledge of communities. suppliers that includes sustainability criteria for sustainable lifestyles ility in its offer of goods and services. b. Develop productive chains with greater a. Define a baseline and performance indicators added value and capacity building c. By 2050 in rural areas for the transformation of dence in increasing the supply of goods and facilitating changes in consumption patterns of agricultural products (for example: sustainable pro- services in the national economy. of men cassava flour mixture 2. Promotion of consumer and leisure purchases c. In 2050 the agricultural sector will be unsustainable in the private sector 4. Promotion of consumption for sustainability. In 2050 the country has grade the use of technologies and best local practices and efficient consumption ta with an information system on the sustainable agriculture production chains with higher added value which has allowed it to increase its competitiveness. tools develop financial incentives or tax-efficient ios for adoption. In 2050 the sibilization number to promote changes in the tion and adaptation to climate change. 12 companies committed to the application of care economy. in 2050 Sustainability criteria make sustainability criteria in their pro- and 90% of Colombian households will affirm 2. Promotion of a healthy diet procurement processes will have increased by taking into account sustainable criteria in its sustainable and healthy integral part of decisions 50% from 2020 baseline. consumption and in the care economy. state consumption to. Inform and sensitize households about the Colombian prisoners and households 3. Strengthening of eco-labelling and b. Provide spaces to promote the con- importance of having a healthy diet- bians environmental seals for highly local and efficient goods and services (peasant markets environmental and social positive urban agriculture to. Develop informative campaigns and etc.) 1. Strengthening of the com- awareness so that a greater number of nological that allow approaching small dietetics that establish a nutritious diet sustainable public purchases (CPS) consumers and companies know the seal producers and local producers to con- healthy Colombian environmental (SAC) to. Strengthen through training in environmental seals entities of the national and territorial order new framework agreements sustainable public 100% of the public entities of the order Na- sustainability stamps have increased among 500,000 inhabitants will have increased in food security has been guaranteed in tional 162 163E2050 bet 4 Just transition of the workforce that improves quality of life and inclusion social and economic of the population ensuring that no one is left behind. 5. Promotion of habits of 3. Promotion of sustainable housing sustainable consumption and best practices in homes to. Develop information programs and to. Promote the construction of housing- awareness for consumers on cri- sustainable measures from the public sectors of sustainability in the consumption of goods and private and sensitize households about and services and their importance the benefits of this type of housing. tions in consumption habits (commercial matches b. Inform and raise awareness about best practices in line with the circular economy tics in homes for example in the efficient use of water and taking into account sustainability criteria when Energy tion of efficient household appliances others. in 2050 fair position of the workforce by 2050 households report carrying out activities 6. Promotion of labor sustainability thanks to differential monitoring to have a more sustainable home. ity in leisure time a. In line with the national strategy for the do and permanent destruction just transition of the workforce (TJFL) status of employment of men and women 4. Promotion of sustainable mobility a. Develop information and establishment programs within the framework of the NDC (the geographical mobility of workers must be defined. awareness of sustainability criteria in 2023) to. Promote mobility alternatives to be taken into account when planning to sustainable (public transport electric vehicles) as well as to ensure the infrae- pos structure necessary for citizens to have pleasant low-impact experiences for cial (territorial can adopt sustainable mobility leisure (gardening (efficient public transport carbon neutrality framework electric charging stations for vehicles). in 2050 2050 the capital cities are mobilized in the middle of planning their free time (vac- from baseline to follow-up to the transition degree (technical of inclusive and alternative transport for tions travel to places of work or study. 50% and 70% compared to the 2020 baseline. 164E2050 ity (circular economy renewable as well as adapt the existing programs in Apuesta 5 line with the needs of the labor market in all educational centers in all country regions. Participation should be encouraged female participation in STEM careers whoa b. Adjust the training and current curricula ization for teachers so that they can develop Rural development roll out effective pedagogical tools with for the different regions of the country gender approach and in line with development of a carbon neutral and climate resilient country. integrated into cities and sectors c. In 2050 employment and training for employment increases and favors biodiversity and continuous pedagogical training that Ecosystem services that respond to market needs c. Promote the formalization of employment in employment in sectors related to car- the most vulnerable sectors in the transition and guarantees food security and bonus neutrality and climate resilience. towards a carbon neutral and resilient economy to the climate (for example: agriculture recycling). in 2050 16 country is reduced to the average of the OECD countries. Creation of conditions for the tran- fair position of the workforce and the 17 generation of green jobs Investments and incentives for the 18 c. Reduction of soil degradation green job creation to. Support and accompany the private sector for agricultural landscapes for au- los by salinization promote TJFL: capacity building a. Create economic incentives to foster the adaptive capacity of severe and very severe degree cation. in the private sector and in organizations to create green jobs in large its inhabitants and the sig- trade unions for a better understanding of small and medium enterprises significant GHG emissions green jobs and risk through a plan of women and recognition of the impor- 2050 multifunctional territorial fication tance of the TJFL. It should include support from the jobs of the country and have ecological participation of native ecosystems to particular to MSMEs. in 2050 from the country green job providers and will have participated b. Study the feasibility of the establishment and there is no expansion of it. AC actively support the just labor transition. of a specific fund to finance GHG capture and storage. ment of projects related to the TJFL b. Reconversion and replacement of 100% of b. Promote social dialogue between companies that includes budget markers of high-impact production systems in e. Between 70% and 100% of children sas and workers in such a way that they identify gender and inclusion. in 2050 establish consensual routes for the transition incentives will have encouraged the creation of climate risk and the capture and storage women labor for both men and women. 150,000 green jobs nationwide. emission of greenhouse gases. in climate adaptation and risk reduction 166Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments in rural areas to safeguard the cone of adaptation thanks to traditional knowledge foundation and traditional and ancestral practices. nal and ancestral heritage of their local communities. F. Consolidate cooperatives with gender parity 20 ro by municipality that implement measures of adaptation and reduction of climate risk at scale Comprehensive conservation practices local and landscape for the collective well-being of its in agroecosystems (biodiver- members in the face of constantly changing weather. sity soil degradation and in- 19 increase the ecological integrity that agri-food systems and knowledge systems sustainable and high capacity of adaptation to guarantee the to. All agri-food systems with mod- human and collective well-being estimated and applied water consumption ules differentially in the production chains. to. Crops of importance for the security food quality and exports b. Between 70% and 90% of UPAs have im- should increase their productivity between implementing waste reduction strategies 30% and 50% sustainably and low risk (under nature-based solutions) carbon with respect to the values in 2021. rarity) on a farm scale (with a landscape vision) je) due to climate variability and change. twenty-one b. Sixteen production systems with prac- practices of efficient use of fertilizers sustainable livestock systems chemically synthesized trogenates. and low carbon c. Reduction of the water footprint in a. Between 50% and 70% of small producers eight agrifood systems. Livestock farmers under incentive schemes or e. Change in average productivity economic and financial instruments for a given of livestock systems within d. Between 20% and 50% of the total area under low-carbon and climate-adapted livestock. the agricultural frontier from Colombia to the agri-food systems will be ensured sustainability two against meteorological phenomena ex- b. Between 70% and 80% cattle farming periods exacerbated by sustainable climate change to favor eco-services f. Changes in technology for livestock with respect to the total planted area. systemic absorption and storage bovine: ≥2 head of cattle per hectare of GHG and reduce the vulnerability of production with an extraction rate of 20.4% and. More than 60% of meat and milk production organizations faced with meteorological phenomena small producers consolidated as extreme weather conditions and climate change. g. Release of between 20% and 40% of the area seed producers Mention of the National Seed Plan. c. Between 70% and 90% of meat and restoration of natural ecosystems milk (and its derivatives) will have forest mentions F. Between 70% and 90% of the territories studied for livestock traceability. cipal is the capture and storage of GHG. nicos (indigenous reservations Colombian agri-food systems with high capacity users have certification and accreditation tions of ranchers sign and comply with ac- sustainable and low-carbon livestock. agreements not to alter wetlands. 168 169E2050 22 Management of fisheries with cri- c. Between 60% and 80% of aquaculture initiatives Bet 6 Basal rural development with native herbivorous species with programs repopulation of native species and evaluation do in ecosystem services of the possibilities of obtaining the fingerlings. and the recovery of the property star of the communities 24 to. Between 70% and 100% of artisanal fishermen- Competitive forest economy Region cities with urban development comply with the procedures effective and sustainable that contributes arts that guarantee the sustainability of fishing to improve well-being comprehensive well-being for its environmental sustainability thanks to food security projects and the reduction of the defor- ria and the promotion of economic alternatives. encourage diversity season and forest degradation b. Between 70% and 100% of fishing stocks and productivity in marine and oceanic waters of Colombia are a. More than two million hectares of robust for the efficient management of your used in a sustainable and responsible way. commercial forest plantations with sal- environmental and social safeguards implemented resources and climate change c. Technological transformation of the plagued fleet to favor GHG absorption. industrial quera to increase the effectiveness the selectivity of fishing methods and for b. Between 46% and 55% of natural forests consumption reduce the discard and incidental fraction. under conservation and sustainable use plans linked to the restoration and strengthening d. Significant reduction in emissions of traditional knowledge and recognized carbon associated with industrial fishing. building forest governance structures local for the conservation of the stocks of car- bonus and other important ecosystem services 23 important for adaptation to climate change. Aquaculture26 growing c. Between 80% and 100% of the wood sustainable and low carbon ra sold will have clear traceability of to. Significant reduction of emissions its production and marketing. 25 of carbon associated with aquaculture. d. Between 50% and 70% of forestry companies Orderly urban growth and b. All planning instruments and b. Between 70% and 90% of initiatives will be certified and subject to effective local and regional planning planning of the territory develop a aquaculture certified in sustainability and sustainable with proven effects on urban-rural planning so that dreams- good production practices ment and commercialization that improve the GHG or reduce the risk due to climate change- traced in its urban development for the optimization in considerations of climate change. productivity infrastructure and effective planning c. 100% of municipalities reduce vulnerability and. The number and capacity of the nurseries co- through ordering processes and pla- ability of the settlements located in community will have increased between 50 neation of the articulated territory % and 70% nationwide 26. The implementation of technology in aquaculture must guarantee an improvement tion of native species that contribute to the climate and that integrate within the deter- d. Cities have urban borders genetics and the food of the animal. restoration of native ecosystems. environmental determinants to climate change. safe bathrooms for the creation of spaces 170Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments buffer between areas with a level of adaptation to climate change to ensure moderate or higher threat or risk and rare conservation of strategic ecosystems urban areas based on nature ludes and gray infrastructure measures. io co-financed by the nation and 100% of the net zero in new and existing buildings. social interest housing projects have 27 and. The country has networks of cities starting with connectivity to transportation systems c. The life cycle of new buildings of regional planning processes for inter- Central urban mobility systems or sustainable transport networks. incorporates construction and demolition waste exchange of experiences two on quality foundation and consolidation of adequate patterns c. Between 80% and 100% of large and inter- construction and demolition waste (C&D) and reduction of externalities of planning and ordering of the territories. medium cities (first category and special) usable in the total weight of the materials transport negatives optimize urban freight logistics. used ales. To achieve these objectives, will require the supply of minerals and materials 26 to. City revitalization projects and d. Between 80% and 100% of vehicles on construction sites such as aggregates Comprehensive management of resources and development of new areas use an egory approach: urban passenger vehicles (bus transportation-oriented development to reach ta waste to contribute to the fo- a participation rate of 70% of the official vehicles have zero technology or innovation-based lows ment of the circular economy active transport modes ing collective and massive public transport) and they will be essential in the goals of Colombia to. Reduction of the amount of solid waste- of micromobility and the reduction of the VKT (vehi- e. The urban and peri- transport infrastructure established through the net zero program two municipal destined to final disposition ass kilometer travelled) in private vehicles. incorporates carbon risk management guidelines (NCC) led by the World Council through preventive techniques lization with the use of emerging technologies. urban port incorporate components of the to reduce damage and losses due to change will be Net Zero from 2030 and all 35% of solid waste from climate activity and extreme weather events. existing buildings will be Net Zero from harvest some are disposed of in controlled landfills. low carbon istro or offsets. 28 b. Generation of energy from the ter- Highly efficient buildings and 29 waste recovery (WTE) adapted to climate change than in imize the use of sanitary landfills. Nature-based solutions their life cycle and interaction with sparseness in the cities and in the the environment generates a net balance of c. The percentage of urban wastewater regions to regenerate zero carbon emissions as treated reaches 80% Rare and expand natural capital wastewater treatment (WWTP) al- highly efficient and with management systems a. 100% of new buildings yes the biogas of water as in sludge digestion. Zero embodied carbon emissions. structuring of territorial ordering and 100% of new buildings and there are urban development conditions for the d. 100% of urban and peri-urban areas net zero in operational carbon. climate change risk reduction and as implement strategies and measures for damages/losses in vital urban infrastructure b. 100% of construction licenses and supply of public services. 100% of Special category municipalities incorporate vulnerability and risk studies to climate change/meteorological phenomena category 1 and 50% of category 2 by de- 27. Low and very low emission technologies are They will be understood as those above the extreme minimum standard and establish the adaptation measures below 1600 m. yes n. m. they will have nine met- required in current legislation. tion and management of the risk to be developed with the square ros of green area per inhabitant. 172 173E2050 bet 7 b. In all cities, sustainable air conditioning is increased for its adaptation amount public and private green structures gender approach to promote services 31 ecosystems related to capturing GEI microclimatic regulation as a strategy for the management of the diversified energy matrix to meet the for adaptation and risk reduction. the impacts of climate change demand through renewable sources and that c. The implementation of measures of will allow access to clean resources and the use adaptation based on ecosystems and infrastructure a. Information and knowledge system gray structure in urban and peri- urban areas of human mobility patterns and their rela- of more efficient technologies. urban reduces between 80% and 90% of the ation with the impacts of climate change. damage to vital infrastructure and the infrastructure associated with energy and water. b. Human movements associated with events climatic conditions are managed in such a way that reduces vulnerability in places of origin 30 and destiny Self-generation with income-generating sources with a gender approach protection of the human rights of persons ovables of energy and the adaptation people exposed to the risk of displacement. tion to temperature changes with sustainable air conditioning c. Participation and protection mechanisms 32 effective tion of people displaced by c. in 2050 to. Between 8% and 15% of the demand for in- disasters and that migrate in the context of Electrification of the economy other energy is covered from self-generation impacts associated with climate change with renewable energy sources. To favor- recognize the differentiated impacts on hom- with levels of an emission factor of the order transformation processes in cer the distributed and decentralized generation men and women and generate lasting processes of 26 g CO per kWh and even bet on es- energy and end use 2 microgrids have been developed 2 tion and VE recharge and inject into the network. capacities and management of climate change. to. in 2050 b. Cities have zones of de- d. Guidelines industrial development where instruments of the national matrix systems are configured from 18% to 26% ran their own supply and disaster risk management and adaptation schemes for carbon neutrality shows that where the national network serves as backup. tion to climate change for management the participation of electrical energy should e. Fossil fuel generation adopts of human mobility in the context of being between 40% and 70% of end uses. energy efficiency strategies and integrates systems c. Implementation of event systems associated with climate change. more about CCUS and other compensation strategies smart and differential metering at 100% b. The generating park has the possibility to achieve operational carbon neutrality. of users (residential cation tion and inclusion of renewable displaced communities d. 100% of the cities implement and migrants and the creation of energy secure territories thermal districts or other solutions that are resilient to the impacts of climate change. bonus and other compensation strategies. reduction of demand and associated emissions. 174Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments b. building regulations adopt self-sufficiency criteria in- Energy for new constructions. c. Solar panels will be installed to pro- 37 tion of electricity in 100% of buildings new in the regions that have potential. Management of the landscape (environment) functional to favor service c. The just transition of the workforce allows ecosystem services and the reduction 34 that the workers of the industry in- of risk due to climatic threats energy form new production companies in the generation and transmission Renewable energies distributed energy tion from renewable resources. energy ion and exploitation according to the regions with the highest d. Reduction of mineral re-sustainability times potential for the generation of each response to external events in the ca- one of the technologies and power supply line. to. Reduction of operational losses connected to the national network through derived from possible impacts of climate change HVAC-alternating current transmission e. Implementation of devices na and of HVDC-direct current itals to automate the demand- for the export and import of energetic- supplies energy efficiently. through the implementation of medica- to. The national transmission system will be adapted to infrastructure-based reinforced to incorporate new technologies and ecosystems guarantee the reliability of the electricity supply. 36 b. 100% of the planning instruments g. Mining diversification (for example: nickel copper as a supplier of raw materials in the cos built in neighboring regions. contribute to strengthening the capacity of carbon storage and storage processes of electrification and energy transition. adaptation of energy systems. (CCUS) and compensation strategies c. Solar and wind farms are integrated sation to be competitive by 2050 in a sustainable way with the activities c. Joint efforts to reduce 33 productive in the regions of influence. change-related damages and losses Distributed electricity generation and a. The thermoelectric plants integrate pro-climate in more than 50% of the roads through which energy efficiency processes decentralized through networks 35 carbon storage and continue to form smart ways to incorporate Digitization to incorporate a new part of the national generation park. d. Hydrographic basins with influence or in- public-private interests in the production influenced by actions in the mining sector you equipment in the final use and tion of electricity closer to b. Incentives or voluntary energy agreements with adaptation measures (ideal- in automated network management the points of consumption and opti- mitical so that companies and projects thermally NbS) implemented voluntarily zar continuous access to the elec- micos can take advantage of the land for the by companies in the energy mining sector tricity by all users a. The distribution and transuse networks of non-conventional sources of energy and oriented towards the assurance of services mission are 100% automated. renewable energy (FNCER) or advanced systems of ecosystem services, being aligned with the to. 100% of users have ac- storage of electricity in batteries. comprehensive water resource management plan. access to electrical energy. supply b. New business models allow in isolated centers it is done with sources in the integration of energy resources c. The thermoelectric plants that finish e. Conservation of 100% of ecosystems renewable 176 177 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia resilient: referents of ambition and instruments you vehicles with movable engines bet 8 gone for those fuels to. liquid fuels mind zero emissions cargo mobility demand in 2050 electricity 21% and natural gas the remaining 1%. tea. So the carbon intensity is Sustainable mobility and infrastructure that reduces in 2050 between 36% and 88% re- in terms of carbon intensity in 2015. result in optimal costs for the economy in all your physical transactions. 42 Disintegration of vehicles for to. Adoption of new technologies from scratch and reduce the circulation of equipment very low emissions for cargo trucks. with polluting technologies b. The energy intensity of the trans- load bearing will be reduced between 30% a. At least 70% of the vehicles in circulation and 45% in 2050 acquired after the year 2035. 40 38    43 Air transport and airports with Transport system not dependent on technologies that reduce the risk- Network of primary and secondary roads- of fossil fuels (majority- made up of secondary roads will offer go for climate change fast charging stations every 100 km. electrically) full mobility of citizens- sponda to Colombia) developing reduce climate risk d. Greenhouse gas emissions US prices for economic development in 2050 should be reduced to a value between and constant price improvement in energy efficiency 19% and 25% compared to 2015 emissions. to. The energy intensity of transport a. Restriction of aircraft operation that a. As of 2030, 100% of the projects of the road passengers (MJ/pkm) was reduced e. 70% of the total mobile demand exceed CO emissions with respect to a limit primary and secondary transport networks will be 2 would be halved in 2050 compared to 2015 number of passengers would be served with a system defined in accordance with technological surveillance. structured incorporating Smart Road criteria. by modal shift and electrification. more public transport in 2050. b. 100% of the aeronautical infrastructure and b. Creation of Smart road corridors b. The energy consumption of the country's airport sector reduces climate risk. Roads in the secondary network. 39 road passenger transport increased will be 40% in 2050 compared to 2015. Promotion of development and adoption c. Between 80% and 100% of projects of transport technologies of 41 transport infrastructure will be structured c. Creation of a public network of states incorporating management guidelines heavy load and machinery tions of urban electric charge and interur- Peak of gasoline and diesel for risk and adaptation to climate change rilla from clean energies bana. In 2050 the interurban corridors year 2040 and the end of the entry of new from the defined methodologies. 179E2050 bet 9 Increase the adaptability of the population and the health system in the face of events sensitive to variability and change in climate in articulation with the determinants social and environmental health. related to land routes 44 three Maritime and river transport to the smart (Smart Rivers) a. Implementation of adaptation actions tion in all modes of transport. integrated into the supply chain intermodal nistro and increase in b. 100% of the new designs of the 46 the basic ecological integrity of the national highways of the country will incorporate adaptive river transport green road infrastructure. Integrated surveillance system and control in public health (SIVCSP) and b. The country has an integrated system to. Consolidation of multimodality with c. Between 60% and 80% of public health surveillance and control projects (SIVC- early warning systems (SAT) logistics at the river-sea interface and inland ports local and regional, including port walkways and cooperation between ports green road infrastructure guidelines. (SAT) of weather-sensitive events for 100% climatic and non-climatic factors tos maritime and inland cos for the optimization of the re- d. Robust information system with a territorial focus b. Increase ecological integrity to incorporate data and information for intersectoral and sectoral management response promote ecosystem services con- risk and adaptation to climate change c. 100% of the public health programs of Erosion control and water regulation for CO in 100% of modes of transport. to. To identify the level of sensitivity to climate-sensitive diseases include actions ensure adaptive river transport. disease climate and. Starting from the base line of damages and losses in alert bral all modes of transportation 45 30% and 50% high and very high risk levels. surveillance and early warning systems Resilient road infrastructure to have developed research on the impacts 47 F. Solutions based on prioritized health care will be implemented for 100% of the im- climate and multi-landscape management nature to reduce risk in ecosystem-mediated impacts (IME) tifunctional to reduce vul- transport infrastructure in 20% of the % of the direct impacts (DI) and 100% of the governance to empower vulnerability and risk of the environment solutions designed and implemented. Institutional-mediated impacts (OMI). 180Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments co-benefits in health and pre- in the exposed population prevention of maladaptation in associated health and economic benefits. to. 100% of projects prioritized that require a permit or license 48 environment have health criteria for of the E2050 prevent differentiated impacts indirect effects generated by climate change infrastructure of the on the magnitude and exacerbation of disease health adapted to climate change deaths and deaths of men and women. co and low emission b. Territorial planning tools transversely incorporate the determi- a. The Expanded Program on Immunizations socio-environmental components of the health of the whole uses climate information for its improvement- population indirect effects generated by climate change for children under 1 year of age and influenza for those over 60 on the magnitude and exacerbation of illnesses and cohabitants of people under 18 deaths and deaths of men and women. years with cancer c. 100% of the municipalities implement b. Health vulnerability due to climate decreases adaptation projects in health starting at 50% compared to the estimate of 2032 differential characterization models two in the community and the territorial entities of maladaptation broaden the base of community participation compared to the baseline of 2022. preparation of the infrastructure of the system allow health to reduce the burden of disease. that guides the E2050 d. The actions of other sectors to achieve the identify entry points climate resilience increase the magnitude of c. It has been possible to reduce morbidity and mortality thanks to policies to identify means of use and health co-benefits Systematic tions to estimate changes (ETV) in prioritized areas according to the level of development objectives within the framework of the constructions (social). What's more endemicity by screening machines that use production when you can avoid buying renewable energy and timely treatment. In general terms ma are going to be impacts directly or indirectly example d. The country has zero unsafe hospitals thanks to the proposed intervention options- climate can reduce the impact of events in the event of a natural disaster or before tropics with respect to the established baseline improve all social dimensions during the preparation of the relocation plan 60% of hospitals in the public mental network I III and IV level of care and 40% of IPS energy private two as green hospitals (establishments reducing atmospheric emissions and conscientious use also benefits the integrity of the that promotes public health by reducing con- biomass (environmental) continuously its environmental impact and removal atmospheric ination and health costs (social). nature are an excellent investment option their contribution to the burden of disease). Synergies can be found with investments in to increase climate resilience (figure 26). 182 183Figura 26. Causal loop diagram (CLD evaluation of system dynamics social indicators Source: E2050: WRI and New Climate Economy <science and <financing> Social variables technology> <disasters + Economic variables natural> + + mobility <education> Environmental variables smart - - + + + consumption < change mobility and + climate> - infrastructure income - + + - ecosystems + marine efficiency energy <science and natural earth managed land technology> inversión + PIB + + + infrastructure + + green energy - - affordable bioeconomy + <education> + energy costs - <education> <science and system social consumption + + technology> + food + production quality of - + healthy - + ++ the food + congestion innovation and + competitiveness - + - + integrity ecological of costs - <change + generation climate> of waste water amount - - + + - - reduce Energy - + <climate financing> (circular economy)> - clean pollution of area + disasters - knowledge and natural climate awareness Note: the graph presents options for <financing> + intervention (presented in orange) means of implementation (highlighted in purple) change (blue) and environmental (green). climate Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments 28. A causal loop diagram (CLD) is a map of the analyzed system or interconnections between the key indicators in the sector or system analyzed (Probst and Bassi “A causal diagram consists of variables connected by arrows denoting the causal influences between the variables. Important feedback loops are also identified on the diagram. The variables are related by causal links the behavior of the variables. Namely Really. Rather (called causal links) positive or negative causal relationship. A causal link from variable A to variable B is positive if a change in A produces a change in B in the same direction. A causal link from variable A to variable B is negative if a change in A produces a change in B in the opposite direction. Circular causal relationships between variables form causal loops or feedback. There are two types of feedback loops: booster and balancer. The first can find when an intervention in the system triggers other changes that amplify the effect of that intervention thus reinforcing it (Forrester the forces of the system (Forrester causal relationships between key indicators a systemic approach (Probst and Bassi implementation of policy interventions social The correct implementation of these sustainable options. This last one is in the center of all of transformation requires a coor- dynamics: it is impacted by all the between the public and private sectors. Exis- other bets have several means of implementation The education to improve access to finance. This is to be considered in isolation. of transversal means of implementation that it gives in relation to the contribution that is offered to the They support a variety of policies. transition to a more sustainable development strategy sustainable and climate resilient Figure 27 presents how the different bets- systemic (WRI and New Climate Economy they can work in synergy address current and known challenges to create new opportunities for a future more sustainable. Smart cities (6) renewable energies (7) and sustainable mobility (8) mainly address the problems caused by the conventional approach of economic growth. The circular economy (3) creates a bridge between the conventional approach and the most sustainable approach creating a just transition (4). Instead biodiversity (2) and rural areas coastal areas (5) prioritize ecosystems and their value tion. Climate data (1) and human health na (9) are transversal. The first affects several drivers of change conventional and being impacted by the most 186 187Figura 27. Simplified representation of the main strategic areas of intervention Source: (E2050-WRI and New Climate Economy <science and <financing> Bet 9. technology> <disasters + Increase the capacity of natural> + mobility + adaptation of the population<ceidóunc ayc ion> smart health system Bet + 8. + Mobility and infr+ae- consumption < change strumcotuvirlaid saods et e nibles Bet 4. + climatic> - infrastructure income Transition - + + Bet 5.- ecosystems fair of the + efficiency of sustainable rural development labor force energy <science and earth gesdtiiofenraednaciadtoie rprao rn raetugriaolnes technology> + START + investment Bet 6. + + infrastructure + City-region + green energy - - with affordable bioeconomy development + <education> integral urban Bet 3. + energy costs - <education> <science and production and consumption system social consumption + + technology> sustainable + food - + production + quality of healthy Bet 2. - + ++ the food + congestion innovation and + Comprehensive management competitiveness - + - + de lai nbtieogdriivdeards ity ecological of costs - <change Bet 7. + generation M + -adtpirdvoize + elu reacsiniriófieencr gadé-taica Ieanlnimdce + rarpcegpaimadítnaAaet ecildnp isóati + uasndtr eedd lmaese taclaagaa dpup e9aao cbs. i ald -al uaccdddi óle imdnsea áys t tirceos> - <financiamdceieo dnnetoosc-> pim-erideincitrooe- dy (ue ccoirn natural climate awareness Bet 1. Knowledge and governance <financing> + climate change climate Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments A) Yes cover the entire drive system underlying causes of change in the socio- economic and environmental situation in Colombia and how Bet 2. the different bets are related to each other. Specifically tuar creating synergies (reinforcing loops expression used in the methodological framework human health (Bet 9) described below) or producing ecosystem goods and services that also Bet 3. opposite effects (balance loops) are often unexpected or unwanted (betting 1. climate resilience (Betting 1). In addition unwanted secondary effects) by limiting the achievement na the potential of economic interventions Sustainable production and consumption have of some desired results. circular and bioeconomy ta 3) In this way related strategies can be developed directly in human health (bet 9) in isolation case in mind On the other hand of each intervention which bet belongs to powerful system social dors requires an assessment of the complementation rities between bets to take advantage of the smart ones (Bet 6) and rural areas synergies and prioritize and implement interven- tions and coasts (Application 5) tions with a systemic approach (table 9) (WRI infrastructure for information systems perform: investments in urban environments have natural resources y New Climate Economy 190 191 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Bet 4. Bet 7. The just transition has the potential to impact Renewable energy has a direct impact tar and enable a variety of other actions on human health (Stake 9) as well as on the trigger private investment and fair transition change (Got 4) allowing both the of behavior On the one hand opportunities to all segments of the population the generation of income for the small and It will allow to take advantage of the strategies of micro-producers. The use of renewable energies sustainable transport (Bet 3) as well as all that sustainable transport can allow (Bet intervention urban areas (Betting A just transition would also generally provide biodiversity (Got 2) by curbing the access to services for the segments plus mining for the extraction of fossil fuels. underprivileged population among others (bet 9). in sustainable production (bet 3). Bet 6. Bet 9. Smart cities include a variety of investments in infrastructure aimed at create a more livable urban environment. The success of these investments is related to use Human health interventions encompass of renewable energies (Got 7) to improve all dimensions of development and can Bet 8. Bet 5. Rare air quality mentation of sustainable transport (Got 8) ca as the virtuous behavior for a to guarantee access to mobility. The result sustainable transition. Human health impacts the rural with all the environmental dynamics indicated above (Stake 2) and sustainable production (Stake 3). by the emphasis on walking and cycling or It would further stimulate a just transition (Apues- more generally ta 4) outside of urban settings and would reduce the pressure created by urbanization and sustainable (Got 3) it would also result in a more resilient more sustainable development thanks to digital services and sustainable mobility is characterized by a financing risk for all options of inter- to the weather (bet 1). effective public services. reduced accidents and human health (bet 9). 192 193 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Table 9. Summary of the existing synergies between the nine bets that make up the E2050 Source: (E2050-WRI and New Climate Economy Bet 9. Bet 2. Bet 3. Bet 5. Bet 6. Bet 7. Bet 8. Bet 1. Bet 4. Increase the capacity Management Production and rural development Cities-region Matrix Mobility and Knowledge and Adaptation Just Transition comprehensive sustainable consumption differ- with energy infrastructure development climate governance the labor force of the population and the sustainable biodiversity ciated by sustainable urban integral diversified regions healthcare system Bet 1. Knowledge and X X X X X climate governance Bet 2. Comprehensive management of X X X X X X X The Biodiversity Bet 3. Production and X X X X X X X sustainable consumption Bet 4. Just transition from X X X X X the workforce Bet 5. Sustainable rural development X X X X differentiated by region Bet 6. Developed cities-region X X X X integral urban roll Bet 7. Energy matrix X X X X diversified Bet 8. Mobility e X X X X sustainable infrastructure Bet 9. Increase the capacity of X X X X population adaptation and the health system 194 195 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments 6.3 Means of implementation for support and promote the climate resilience 6.3.1 Prospective analysis of the mix of means of implementation public policy instruments to promote E2050 were a higher level of influence and that they are ca and the role of the key actors closer to the strategic bisector. From this In order to generate recommendations that perspective allow the country to move towards desirable scenarios in a sustainable manner able to guarantee compliance with the Agreement- country's competitiveness do of Paris and achieve climate resilience per year gender gaps 2050 results of the prospective analysis of instruments of ra the territory and design strategies of adaptation dependent ii) are: economic growth public policy and institutional framework do with the support of expert implementers of the greenhouse effect public policy at the national level. For this evaluated in three phases Micmac cross cough influence the system and that must be addressed soil and multifunctional landscapes. These variables sar changes on the motor in the short term, directly to mark, they exercise the greatest motor skills and if they are not attended to, the most dependent. This double feature science and technology desired trajectories of actors and strategic objectives that can These variables suggest that the main objec- short-term actions that address them direct- tion come to occupy at the time of executing actions that the resilience strategy must attend to mind to improve the system and iii) the identification of climatic is to guarantee the multifunctionality and the tivo future scenarios and strategic routes for sustainable uses of landscapes that today are at unwanted risk. From this point of view the scope of the most probable scenario (Brigard go for the advance of the agricultural frontiers Urrutia 2021). and urban the provision of ecosystem services. Also capacity to create and protect multi- dependency landscapes: governance Cross-impact analysis reflects the relevance of protecting the multifunctional- functional and better uses of the land. and science and technology ity of those landscapes that have not yet been acquired by their location a level of transver- In the short term (2020-2030) the variables that have been transformed but are at risk of being The less influential and dependent variables Important output that can accompany the should be addressed as a priority 196 197 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Figure 28. multifunctional Relations of direct influence between the environmental variables of the territory and the adequate use of the actors and strategic objectives evaluated through the Micmac soil tool. The strategic variables that will drive Source: E2050: Brigard Urrutia six: economic growth The Biodiversity Conserv Usosuelo reduction of deforestation growth land use and reduction of gas emissions National Planning Department CountryMulti Greenhouse Compet. A) Yes GEI Productive should concentrate their efforts on addressing the These actors have a role of power against the Defores SisProdu I II four variables challenge of the most likely scenario: others that respond to their ability to inci- Riskclim conservation of biodiversity order you land use planning and reduction of emissions, and even the existence of the other actors. His a ci ions of greenhouse gases. role is important in that they can promote n projects and processes of the coordinating actor of the And u RiskTran strategy (figure 29). fl n I Infrae Gobernan Except know Innovation CienTi Figure 29. Mobility Plan of influences and dependencies between actors elaborated with the Mactor tool Participates Educa Source: E2050: Brigard Urrutia III IV PP DNP Electra MonitoringC + Influential and Dependent (Conflict) Gender DisplaC CNGremial Dependence MyHaciend This way Regulatory and policy efforts to 2050 in +Influence MinAmbien Note: Quadrant I represents the variables with the highest system influence a and dependency or volatile influence and dependence or regulators and the IV the variables n influence (land uses and multifunctional landscapes) result or levers. The orange bisector represents u tional) the strategic path. self-employed dination and coherence between expressions I Crecimeco: economic growth specific territorial aspects of intersec- AltaCoPe Compete: competitiveness agricultural climate displacement education Governance: governance Health structure ANT CPCComp climate land use planning greenhouse PaisMulti: multifunctional landscapes of biodiversity Dependence 198 199Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments The actor with the greatest influence and dependence is the variable. The analysis of actors presents a great Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development disarticulation between them (Min Environment). This actor is also named in its high levels of autonomy (more than 70%). swim conflict actor ulize or invigorate the actions proposed crosscutting and coordinating the strategy (in this compared to the total of strategic variables select- case mentioned. Plays an important role as a protagonist its potential to articulate and coordinate the totali- in its implementation. Other actors who must actors and can easily be supported to assume a more leading role are the Ministry of of influential actors to advance their Science projects and processes. The autonomous actors Agriculture and Rural Development. It is important that show a low level of influence and depend- the E2050 works on transforming the patterns of dence each one can easily meet their National with ethnic and peasant communities 6. Climate risk: the country's municipalities public institutions are in favor of the objectives functions although they express a high level of autonomy disarticulation affects the future development of should assume a more leading role. innovative tion and risk reduction. vos of conservation and economic development that the strategy. It will be in the hands of the actor coor- they must be overcome to better direct the dinador (MinAmbiente) the task of working on On the other hand its articulation to meet the objectives of the with the support of experts strategic variables. are expected to be met for all variables. restored and reforested. Faced with the minimum percentage of actors in Two types of ratings were also made against some targets. Finally stimuli of the influential actors identify- the actors29 and second two are: civil society organizations ethnic and peasant communities and the proposed mayoralties30. The objectives designed for each national with a strong emphasis on adapting- unsustainable of the economy can affect and governorates. They are actors who dependence decisions taken today to 1. Economic growth: the country in- 9. Greenhouse gases: the country re- in the long term. On the other hand comply with E2050. This situation makes them will increase their GDP in a sustained manner will reduce emissions with respect to the baseline Consejo Nacional Gremial in actors challenge of the system that should assume a more predominant role acquired in the framework of the Paris Agreement in meeting the objectives for each 2. Productivity: the country will increase its National Designated Contribution (NDC). associated with the reduction of deforestation sustained productivity rates. and biodiversity conservation can A) Yes 3. Competitiveness: the country will increase the objectives that present greater favorability, for example its global competitiveness index. are those associated with the growth variables, therefore economic 29. The ranges of influences are: (0) no influence influence on processes influence over mission more of sustainable production and maintain- that 80% of the experts are "in favor" of the many challenges that the E2050 must assume to facilitate 30. The ranges of the influences are: (0) the objective is little consequent operative Projects 5. Conservation of biodiversity: it can put your projects or your mission at risk. economic and biodiversity conservation of the actor's missions and (4) the goal jeopardizes the actor's own existence. If the actor is in the country, the percentage of In general will increase against the objective a sign (-) will be assigned to the valuation. terrestrial and marine protected area. cicio agreed that 85% of true socio-ecological climate resilience. 200 201 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Figure 30. The actors in charge of implementing and inter-climate. According to this scenario Histogram of involvement of actors on the objectives defined for the strategic variables finalize the mandates associated with resilience economically and design strategies to Source: E2050: Brigard Urrutia coordinated and concerted depending on the vari- but its biodiversity and forests are deteriorating most influential specific variables Histogram of the involvement of the Pro Against overcoming the scenario of challenges identified in land use planning strategies and reduction actors on the 2MAO objectives the exercise. Beyond country adopts a periodic review policy responds Increase compliance with its climate commitments associated with the COVID-19 pandemic economic cos that allows it to adapt its policies and its hoisted by high unemployment rates regulatory and institutional framework to meet ity and poverty Productivity your climate resilience goals long-term trends focused on achievement long-term Conservation of ecosystems alike (figure 30). those associated with the protection of biodiversity ecosystems and biodiversity. facing east Scenario and scenario analysis is clear that short-term actions Climate risk medium and long-term probabilities of occurrence should be aimed at reducing circumvent the fulfillment of the most likely scenario System of Finally Production towards regulatory and policy instruments this most likely scenario: conservation of sustainable ca priorities to guide the transformation biodiversity Deforestation towards a climate resilient country through a cross-probabilistic analysis for the greenhouse effect. Ordering identify the most feasible scenario to launch Territorial the necessary alerts to route the instru- This scenario prioritization result normative and policy elements Greenhouse gases all other means of implementation E2050 regarding policy instruments greenhouse that accompany and facilitate the vision of the and normative E2050 is reached. all other means of implementation Competitiveness that the relative pessimism that is perceived must A) Yes 15 30 45 60 75 scenarios probability ables: economic growth Note: in yellow the percentage of the National System of Biodiversity Change is shown. favorability of the actor on the objectives and in Climate (SISCLIMA) can constitute a station purple the percentage of opposition alternative to increase GHG interdependence. It was precisely the growth of civil society (including ethnic communities) cia between the actors Although the actors show consensus on common goals. Finally regarding their positions regarding the objectives of public and institutional policy tives raised self-employed (low influence and low dependency- so that the benefits of SISCLI are enhanced- Very interestingly, the scenario that cia) evidence that more MA articulation is needed among them ties to achieve this articulation take into account your concurrence of goals. The forta- effectively integrate the coordinated action of major challenges to achieve resilience actions developed for each variable. 202 203 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Figure 31. Logic, the analysis is approached from the understanding sectoral integration at the national level and for Plane of probabilities of the scenarios due to their influence on coordination built through the Smic tool Source: (E2050-Brigard Urrutia the instruments. The proposals are grouped into 110000 111111 the following sections (CIDER 2021): It is proposed to deepen the incorporation of the 001110110000 111101 011101010010 110101 10I0m0p0r0eme0n10ta11c1ion111110 climate change and the development of the 000100 001000 Coordination of national policies related to E2050 in the PIGCCS; for the PIGCCS 111010 010011 111000 010100 101010 110010 011110 MADS 000000 001100 The integration of mitigation and protected areas and their management and the elements of 001011 110100 111011001010 000010 adaptation to climate change in the development of the ecological structure in the deter- 011100 110011111100 000111 010101 110110 of the PIGCCS and PIGCCT 101000 101100 100000 intrasectoral and the definition of guidelines for the development of agreed guidelines between 010001 011010 101011 011111 101111 the incorporation integrated in the instruments the MVCT 011011 at regional and local level 000110 101101 between the sustainability model and the threat and risk model of the POMCA 001101 of economic development. In line with the basic risk principles (EBR) and the detailed studies 110111 100110 Principles of the law and the National Risk Exchange Policy (EDR) of the POTs. For the PIGCCS 100100 111001 011000 Climate of Colombia 101110 Climate Change Management must address cough in relation to territorial models 100101 mitigation and adaptation in a combined manner, and the sustainable and resilient occupation of the land. 100011 001110 nothing32 in priority sectors through the thorium 000001 100111 100001 PIGCCS and in the territories 000011 110001 Additionally 100111 011001 010110 roll of co-benefits that the implementation of the structuring systems33 101001 000101 sectoral actions is complemented with medi- ism and sustainable construction with measures of integrated climate change data. adaptation associated with the EBR and EDR of storm drainage34 6.3.2 Instruments of Consolidation in this framework It is important to highlight that the integrative vision planning and regulatory ordering of existing instruments31 from the strengthening of its implementation of co-benefits would accelerate the incorporation of the Understanding planning and articulation instruments territorial and environmental as possible means of implementing the current legal framework Mention of the E2050 mitigation as well as adaptation tions to incorporate climate change and effective climate change in the instruments work teams. It is proposed that separate for mitigation or adaptation optimize the instruments and the articulation between coughs. This way until now. they 33. So that the design and planning of movement systems potential to achieve the carbon-neutral objectives- most of the proposals focus on the public policy of the prioritized sectors that ity trality and resilience to the climate in the territories for the development of policies or other mechanisms that have PIGCCS in a transversal manner. Contribute to both adaptation and reduction of Colombia of the E2050 (CIDER 2021). continue to incorporate opportunity management to maximize the chances of 34. In particular with the management of runoff flows climate change in plan instruments- implementation of climate change measures- in private properties and reduction of flow in systems territorial ification Sanitation (RAS) risk 31. Rather than proposing transformations of waterproofing instruments by designing urban drainage systems, a sequence that poses temporal horizons- an integrating vision (combining adaptations- in terms of maintenance lation 204 205 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments te of risk management in instruments 10 of Law 388 of 1997 of land use planning and planning contained in Law 1931 of 2018. development in coordination with the planning environmental fication and optimize its scope Faced with the incorporation of the management of the technicians and scales from the regional perspective to respond to risk study methodologies challenges that go beyond the limits political admin- fundamental unify basic criteria or instructive Mention of instruments financing ation Institutional learning and technical assistance improving the information available to all environmental authorities and authorities in the adoption the territory of the Peace Agreement as an opportunity to reduce the territorial gaps. development and risk management with support in reviewing and adjusting POTs further differential questions and governance models in the preceding sequence is also due development planning territorial climate in accordance with territorial dynamics and environmental planning ments of occupation and use of the territories and development and prioritize sources of financing. and develop models of gradualness and diversity tion for implementation. in planning instruments with the institutional capacities and needs Control and follow-up incorporation of climate change. Regarding the planning instruments of drought associated with saving water and that defined by national policies are aligned with Temporality and sequencing of land use planning reduction of emissions by saving energy the objectives in buildings35 and its relationship with the training licenses of the E2050 of urban planning and construction. It could also be acquired by the country through the NDC and that In the long term, the different institutions must be achieved to exercise control contribute by developing fuel-based message rethink instruments climate change management instruments management and financing of fossil urban development and exploitation of ecosystems than environmental planning Law 9 of 1989 and Law 388 of 1997. contradict the sustainability model for a territorial na- tion and development planning and short-term to face the difficulty future carbon neutral and climate resilient. count it with a sequence Finally of sustainability with the development model Territorialization of coughs. The above economic PIGCCS Faced with the territorialization of policies, the inclusion of the decision management component in the face of adaptation to change it is proposed i) to delve into climate change in POTs integration of the national guidelines of the PIGCCS and define the mechanisms for its Regional Environment (PGAR) with the others climate change in law-enforcement instruments in other instruments through strategic axes 35. Resolution 0549 of 2015 of the MVCT set out gradual goals water and energy savings for the country's cities these have been implemented since their expedition. ii) materialize the incorporation of the component- National Government must regulate the environmental and climate change article. 206 207 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Strengthening of tools is required as partial fees to organize mation associated with territorial and Afro aspects of the different territorial entities- actors anchored in the territories the capabilities in technical terms and construction and evaluation of indicators that articulate institutional agendas with the allow both the definition of solid social organization baselines. as its execution and operation in coordination with national initiatives within the system- As ma of cities. For this efects formulation of a long-term structural plan for the organizational forms of each territory adopted through a state policy that thorium and where models are formulated with a focus on cover several fronts with the design of objectives that are territorial. This way clear ts that order the expenditure and the sources of financing the consultation scenarios and seeks that the actors ciation criminal with legal components cultural and technological that attends the conduc- and follow-up criminal activities that lead to environmental damage the recognition of the realities of having an effective impact on the design of policies each territory and the actors involved. public records on climate change at the national level and in the regulation and implementation at the Departmental and municipal climate governance. Proposes to design better mechanisms for the Incorporation of the E2050 and its bets dialogue with the actors of the territory based on the planning and ordering instruments recognition of their organizational forms and the territorial and environmental need to find scenarios where the voice of the participants transcends to stage This section raises what to develop or deepen nares of responsibility and legitimacy which as a transversal element to achieve the contribution to the implementation of the E2050 and E2050 and advance in i) the articulation of the espa- their bets for the construction of a futu- community services with carbon-neutral and climate-resilient ro-intake spaces in the decisions the cycle of public policy and iii) deepen the action scope of participation towards scenarios of strategic axes and the bets of the E2050. Is involvement and responsibility. in addition It is considered important to design instrument spaces in the strategic axes of the of interaction that allow to see the planning capacity and the territorial ordering and of the different social actors of programmatic articulation illities organizational forms such as the Action Boards integration and articulation between instruments. Communal (JAC); the individual organizational figures 208 209Figure 32. Relations between the bets of the E2050 and the components of the environmental and territorial planning and ordering instruments Source: E2050: CIDER University of the Andes axes strategic Change Organization Management Organization Planning climate environmental risks territorial development bets E2050 AP1 - AP9 AP2 AP1 AP5 AP6 AP8 AP1 - AP9 PIGCCS PIGCCS MADS PIGCCS MADS PIGCCS PIGCCS MADS PIGCCS MADS PIGCCS MADS PIGCCT PIGCCT POMCA ENVIRONMENTAL DETERMINANTS POMCA POMCA HAZARD AND RISK ANALYSIS PGDF RISK AWARENESS PGRD PGRD CC ADAPTATION MEASURES POT POT-SP-EE POT-SP-EBR POT RURAL POT URB CAN STRUCTURAL SYSTEMS PND/PDD/PDM PND/PDD/PDM Grades bets 1. If it has climate change incorporated 2. SP - EE: Protection soil - Ecological structure 3. EBR: Basic Studies AP1: Climate knowledge and risk management of Risk - Soil of protection - condition of threat / risk 4. Soil of protection - Agricultural production / compo- AP2: Biodiversity and ecosystem services AP6: Comprehensive urban development rural area - CDR - Restricted development category 5. Protected land - Public services - Cultural heritage AP3: Sustainable production and consumption AP7: Diversified energy matrix / urban component 6. Structuring Systems: Mobility - Public Services - Public Space - Facilities 7. AP4: Just transition of the labor force AP8: Mobility and sustainable infrastructure Environmental Management Plans and Protected Areas AP5: Rural Development E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments POT for flood hazards and risk Bet 1 torrential floods and mass movement communities and the conservation of bodies to reconversion processes for sustainable use prioritized in Colombia; simultaneously surface and underground hydric posses. of rural land proposes to advance knowledge and incorporate agrological ration of phenomena related to the variab- rural production that allow a balance between Knowledge and ility of climate and marine threats and risks generating income for communities coastal climate governance37 that the POMCA and POMIUAC could Bet 3 with the capacity to absorb emissions or to For the development of this commitment, it is proposed to start contributing on a regional scale incorporation of climate change in the reduction scheme of gradualism and subsidiarity. tion of risk and in environmental planning and the consolidation of areas territorial and in the development of climate scenarios Sustainable production and consumption forested in water rounds future more precise and localized36 that allow Bet 2 ciadas said incorporation. It is proposed to deepen the For this bet incorporation of future and historical scenarios environmental and territorial cation can contribute in marine coastal planning of the territory threat and risk tion in more sustainable processes of ecological change and the consolidation of infrastructu- POMCA in charge of environmental authorities biodiversity land use in the 1:25,000 scale for rural land and in those of an approximation to the life cycle and design basic risk studies (EBR) of the POT that Territorial planning instruments- of cities and buildings. analyze the risk for municipalities of expansion and human settlements e for the absorption of emissions and with EbA and NbS critical infrastructure on rural land at scale starting with protected areas at scale 1:5,000. the national and regional strengthening of ecological structures in integral urban development It is recommended to prioritize the territories with a greater local scale. In addition to strengthening the Just Transition concentration of exposed elements (major ecological agglom- ture urban erations) or those that are in giving the complementary ecological structure increased risk; also complete the EBR of the including the incorporation of measures in The development of this bet would not develop models of territorial development urban public space and drainage systems directly through planning and insurance pluvial private with natural elements such as huer- relationship with what was proposed in bet 3. the incorporation of climate change in soils urban tas ings for resilience in models of It is proposed to promote management practices territorial development it is proposed the revitalization 36. Planning will be much more accurate with development Bet 5 sustainable natural resources and measures of existing urban areas roll of more detailed future weather scenarios adaptation das with emphasis on man- densification and compactness at reasonable levels It is important to highlight that the historical climatic data of IDEAM meteorological stations are crucial for the maintenance of water resources understanding of past climate and extreme events connectivity conditions and weather patterns and fundamental to the models the conservation and restoration of ecosystems differentiated by region projects for the expansion of urban areas historical climatic conditions and the calibration of climate models future threat and risk. protected for ecological and hydrological connectivity 37. Flooding and coastal erosion as well as the integral management of water from rural POTs storm surge tropical 212 213 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Finally adaptation measures in renewable urbanization processes by including them as activities and construction that aim to generate changes that are permitted or compatible with land uses in the land occupation pattern the creation of more permeable cities39 in the new developments opportunities offered by occupied areas in low intensity and urban voids (public areas Bet 8 and private and the processes of revitalization and redensi- fication of urban land). What's more main ecological structure and its enhancement sustainable infrastructure as green infrastructure for regulation of the hydrological cycle and contribution to connectivity It is recommended that ecohydrological from SUDS occupation public service for adaptation (water parks buffer gaps permeable). and in buildings infrastructure and buildings40 ecological drains slope grading occupation and treatment of permeable soil. considering climate change scenarios. The reduction of emissions and transport through the compactness of cities logistics flows Bet 7 and not motorized. of buffer spaces between areas with a diversified energy matrix Bet 9 a medium or high level of threat or risk and the urban areas adaptation with its immediate urban environment and that of planning and territorial ordering and generation of public space intervention and restoration38 of can generate favorable conditions for the adaptation of the population water rounds and riparian ecosystems mangroves them. Likewise, the implementation of Although public health is mostly 39. See what was proposed in relation to flow management water retention measures within runoff in the section on articulation of policies absent in the regulations and the scope of the private or public services of the city 38. Edges that incorporate eco-reduction measures and EbA 40. In secure areas outside of areas in condition of reforestation and afforestation gray infrastructure measures and urban areas. non-mitigatable risk. provide technical assistance to territorial entities. 214 215 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments PROPOSALS TO OPTIMIZE THE CONTRIBUTION OF THE PLANNING INSTRUMENTS Temporality and sequence of instruments TERRITORIAL AND ENVIRONMENTAL TO THE E2050 Implement a logical sequence to promote Source: E2050: CIDER 2021. Articulation of change management instruments climate territorial planning and development planning. Transformations and changes proposed in the instruments of territorial and environmental planning bia so that they contribute to achieving the objectives of the E2050 environmental planning instruments roll and prioritize funding sources for implementation. Control and follow up Articulation of national policies Integrate mitigation and adaptation to change Develop processes and mechanisms for monitoring the climate in the instruments. implementation of climate change measures. Incorporate guidelines in the PIGCCS for the integration Strengthen the control and monitoring of instruments gration between sectors and for territorialization. planning and environmental management territorial control and climate change management. Reconcile the sustainability model with the economic development model. Strengthen urban control for compliance of parameters associated with climate change. In addition to specialized areas has permeated the public policy of the prioritized sectors climate governance two that have PIGCCS transversally. Design dialogue mechanisms with the actors of the territory. Territorialization of national policies Recognize planning skills Deepen the integration of national guidelines of indigenous peoples. endpoints of climate change in the instruments. The organizational forms of the peasant and Afro communities Materialize the incorporation of the risk management component- are relevant actors in the implementation of E2050. go in the instruments of territorial ordering and planning of development in articulation with those of environmental planning. Governance and governability: allies in compliance with E2050. Strengthen planning from the regional perspective- Strengthening of the instruments associated with E2050 bets to respond to the dynamics of the territory that cross political-administrative boundaries. Incorporate future and historical threat and risk scenarios the threat and risk analyzes of the POMCA (scale 1:25 and in the basic risk studies (EBR) of the POT (1:5,000). Deepen the implementation capacity of the instruments ments tutional exposed (urban agglomerations) or those that are at higher risk and complete the RBEs of the POTs (inundation Prioritize institutional strengthening processes tutional and technical assistance. Improve the information available for the entire territory. To advance in the knowledge and incorporation of phenomena related related to climate variability and the threats and risks Shorten territorial gaps in planning exercises within the framework of the implementation of the Peace Agreement. stales (POMCA 216 217 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments 6.3.3 Education technology and innovation contribute to the creation of better futures for all and to stimulate a vocation for future research Education with a focus on climate change educators in all areas of knowledge from it will be an active education for life by the need to respond internationally gral personal concerns of each subject in their interdependent and complex relationship between communities and decision makers educational path. It will highlight the sense of human and nature) will be the great dynam- how the existence of a culture of innovation in urgency mobilization of climate actions by individual (mindset) and collective capacities of each context and that will add final the educational community and of the different act- (mainstream) and the transformation (cultural social res in the territory with the political and economic development) of the country. To achieve it, it will integrate indicators to measure the appro- school missions and social missions aligned carbon neutrality and climate resilience is tion with the great CTI missions defined at the necessary level a society that establishes its own to National (Explora Park) ities and emerging faculties of growth eration of the different social actors and It will be promoted throughout the socioeconomic educational community through leapfrogging (leap The missions prioritized by the mission of wise the mobilization of joint climate action building a holistic vision around frogs strategy) or frog jumping strategies to the understanding of nature from how it has been referenced in Spanish. the CTI system will be permeated by state-academy-business-society action dynamics scientific knowledge nal needs from all communities and groups formation of systems social in the country's territories. Ways to measure the production and management of knowledge available for the creation of certification will be contemplated. access to material related to climate change knowledge. This adaptability will be an opportunity new policies and decision-making. The political society in different languages of indigenous communities Afro-descendants and Raizales be subject (not just object) of knowledge. the integral formation of a diverse global citizenship; will contribute in addition undo the roles and women in climate change management that knowledge progress towards gender equality. Business models and green jobs are necessary. This da (imagination) a permanent review of all proposals will accelerate the just transition of the workforce of education and STI in relation to mitigation with human rights approaches and adaptation to climate change to ensure equality of rights and opportunities for all Colombia will design and implement one of climate change genders and with perspectives on their needs. A large National Approaching System will be formed. Educational strategy for the development of skills. Develop science by itself. particular data. Social Piation of Knowledge that will allow ities in English identify The investigation experienced people cas of knowledge and learning with sense and advancement of informal education and STI with competitive and make collaborations with countries respect and recognition by all kinds of do. It will allow responding to the concerns of those focused on climate change. This will develop potency in education. The above will strengthen knowledge students in a critical way and will connect them with a citizen science capable of generating knowledge the development of STEM+A disciplines 218 219 INFORMATION Figure 33. Vision CTI and education to achieve climate resilience country potential Source: E2050: Explora Park MAKE DECISIONS Emerging faculties EDUCATION (environmental education) KNOWLEDGE innovation Leap frogs Research Socio-technological transition Companies and socioeconomic + TJFL Vocations with a focus Technology transfer archetypes technical programs Education for Technologists technological work and technological development superior of dllo. Human new capabilities high quality of human resources Intellectual property Measurement of the CTI Social impact Strengthening Mentor Teachers competitions Science and citizen education Experiential education School mission formal Bilingualism Focus STEM + A preservation of life Individual Citizen Science Transformation Education Social mission Public awareness Ecosystemic common good informal cultural better society collective informed Responsibilities differentiated Beginning Approach and language Social Appropriation of Knowledge (ASC) differential Holistic vision Territoriality Articulation and capillarity • Confluence of knowledge •  Human rights multicultural knowledge • Inter-institutional citizen science traditional and scientific individuals • Gender equality • National system of CHWs from the regions • Age Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Experimentation spaces Table 10. Research for the advantage transdisciplinary. professionals in Strategic lines in education and CTI for the E2050 chamiento and substitution the sectors with the greatest potential tuition of materials Source: E2050: Explora Park for the bioeconomy (agricul- out cosmetic and bioenergy). Development of material recovery and manual skills Bets Strategic lines yourself or (DIY Bet 3. English) that encourage progress Digital logistics tools production and technological reverse waste and strengthening Education sustainable construction of networks for consumption and awareness technology and innovation response to the demands of inno- and local sustainable production. market vation. society with sustainable lifestyles women with access to social education disruptive social in sustainability that integrates logic of consumption and with from the first levels with a focus on solutions. Trained technicians and technologists Early warning systems practical knowledge for obtaining for prevention and mitigation by tweeting this knowledge. analysis and processing of of adverse impacts caused technology-supported data. by natural events and for the Higher education programs outbreak anticipation and management Technical and technological education and education for work and of diseases. Fortified centers. Development promotion- Transdisciplinary research- human development that deepens synthesis created as a bridge roll of skills for the leaders for the establishment of Bet 1. cen necessary knowledge among scientists for obtaining decision makers Knowledge and analysis of climatic variables by Bet 4. what modeling medium governance. Citizen- disciplinary and collaborative climate change company formed to undertake Just Transition from generate synthesis of knowledge learning of science and technology used for the projection of scenes preventive and affirmative actions the workforce cough in climate change with a focus on climate change. nares to stop deforestation resolve questions and demands Citizenship most vulnerable with fair labor force and trans- reforest specific to society and for access to training programs parity in resource management. the different variables that influence Public politics. A society for employment and with a process Citizen science developed. in the destruction of ecosystems determined to innovate for its priority employability. more. development of vocations environmental sustainability. STEM+A throughout society. Systemic studies and interdisciplinary of Colombian husbands. Education with a territorial approach Agroecology research rial and gender that includes all Research the elements of socioecosystems Pedagogical strategies that give as much detail as possible but prioritize the transdis- biodiversity and technology services to increase Bet 5. extension agents in climate change typography and the best technology available. 2nd al bet Citizenship empowered for Technologies for monitoring the interoperability of Rural development Professionals and technicians for Management achieve inclusive governance full participatory and informed decision-making in the territories- of the species environmental and social biodiversity. Citizen- rivers educated girl climate risk and geographical safeguarding strengthened. peasant and social innovation maritorios human lives and well-being. Promising Community and Community Products Promoted Country and city interrelated. Biodiversity in the market from agroecological science. Appropriate technologies for and by the communities in the territories. 222 223 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments 6.3.4 Economic instruments Studies in risk management Training for public officials adaptation and ecosystem cos on climate change issues. more urban in response Awareness and information to Currently to the social dynamics in consumers on solid legal issues of economic instruments and cities brought about by change of CO that are produced at a financial level that support environmental policies 10. Payment for environmental services. 2 climate. The best technology domestic and urban; incentive to be Bet 6. available for the reuse of such water and sustainable development replicators of the importance of residual sustainable consumption and veedores Cities-region ification of waste and its green use. Most of them have a good in the control and monitoring of with chamiento development. Self-generation with carbon footprint of the different operating times and it is counted not only with However comprehensive urban renewable energy sources sectors of the economy. Culture-experience on its operational viability but aspects in which new in cities with efficiency recognition of the change also with its legal certainty. Also specific economic instruments for energetic. information technologies climate and climate actions information for decision making, there are instruments that comply with issues such as the incentive for the bioeconomy of adaptation and mitigation in systems and information systems the dual purpose of i) encouraging circular economy cities from strategies citizen education on the quality private tes to develop climate actions and investments and the generation of green jobs gias of collective construction. of the air and the level of emissions. sions that collaborate with the climate goals with a gender approach for adaptation to the and ii) collect fiscal resources that can be climate change used to finance environmental actions and investments. investigations around Pedagogical strategies that public that do not have the same capacity Bet 7. unconventional sources prioritize the trans-collection approach (Econometrics 2021). For the prospective analysis presented in of energy disciplinary Matrix and energy efficiency. Instruments are classified below. contextual. citizenship prosu- energy Clean and efficient technologies The most important instruments with the following form (Econometrics 2021): energy and consci- diversified as the basis of a matrix that is counted at the time of formulation entity of its consumption. diversified energy. of the E2050 mostly have the capacity • Instruments for the internalization of ex- to sustain themselves over time and strengthen ternalities and carbon pricing: they are those to achieve the goals set in the major that seek to determine the price of a Citizenship on the move Bet 8. preferably at least the year 2050. The order of prioritization tive or consumption (such as the sustainable public transportation. Technologies to Mobility e of current instruments is the following carbon emissions) and seek inter- and massive infrastructure- (Econometrics 2021): to analyze the social cost of these externalities ra sustainable to a lesser extent private electric vehicles. and an informed citizenry. negative facts 1. Emissions trading system. of goods and services in the economy. 2. Carbon tax. • Other market instruments: these are Academy that generates information the creation of market conditions constant training 3. Incentives for alternative energies and EE to stimulate the free participation of with a gender perspective and Regional actors trained private agents in financing start-ups as detailed as possible Bet 9. for a governance that empowers on threats and impacts 4. Financial incentives compatible with climate policy. cie co-benefits in health and Increase the risk of climate change in health (rates that prevents diseases human capacity climate sensitive. Citizen- adaptation of technologies that allow the generation informed girl population and ar information in real time and response health system adverse weather conditions for health. 6. Financial instruments Law 388. on capturing payments from those who receive health surveillance and control (SIVCSP) and systems benefit from public action and early warning (SAT). 7. Renewable energy auctions. appropriately transfer them to those who incurred in the costs of said actions. 224 225 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments • Subsidy instruments and trans- positive impacts on green growth and reference: they are direct aid from Es- nalmente ted to private agents change their behavior in accordance with resources between them. Encourage the private sector dance with climate policies. to a clean technological conversion reduce the cost of the externality within the process • Adverse incentives: these are measures that are productive for those who continue to generate them. negatively affect the effectiveness of climate policies and expect them to be modified or disassembled. In the period prior to 2030, the SCE will be regulated for which it is important to have feedback Next of the most relevant existing instruments and conducted the pilot exercises. It is expected to start the new instruments that the E2050 proposes the first phase of the PNCTE41 to achieve its economic sustainability in the and make viable the measurement mechanisms 2 long term. There is also the elimination and verification o Reformulation of instruments that generate incentives for non-regulated initiatives (offsets o It is a tax applied to the purchase of fuel) incentives adverse to the objectives of the carbon credits strategy) and define the requirements for fossil fuels to the producer or importer. The rate In the period prior to 2030, regulations must be (Econometrics 2021). The possible direct assignment of quotas to tax agents is defined by the State and the interaction of the IC with the SCE must be agreed upon. regulated with risk of loss of competitiveness with the emission factor of each fuel. emissions from fossil fuels 6.3.4.1 Prospective international instruc- tion. They must also be generated It is charged at the beginning of the distribution chain to be internalized twice. In the meantime they must ments of internalization of capacity building spaces in liquid fossil fuels and combus- study the barriers that have prevented the private sector to create a reporting culture for industrial use. The cost of the tax is made up of validation bodies externalities and carbon-pricing of emissions. The possibility of transmission through it should be studied until it is incorporated and verification of pollution mitigation projects. Emissions trading system to incorporate the obligation to imports in the price to the final consumer. Nowadays (SCE) (Law 1931 of 2018) have made a payment of the carbon price in Colombia, a fee equivalent to In addition in your country of origin. USD 5 per ton of carbon emitted for validation and quality verification that allow It is a carbon pricing mechanism that allocates covered fossil fuels. In the years in which accounting for these reductions for na emission quotas for companies from different During the 2030-2040 period, the SCE should have been operating Sectors that are required to be incorporated into regulated sectors support their emissions with these quotas. The State emissions related to livestock and verified/certified (carbon bonds) due Other environmental taxes- issues the number of quotas compati- grazing ble with mitigation goals and places them between agricultural (CH from rice and fertilizer use) and lo42 4 companies for them to trade with each other at the end of the decade should have eliminated- they present the supports that show the removal- through a regulated market. Seeks that each direct allocations to regulated agents There are taxes such as the use of bags company in the regulated sector select the alter- dos that have been delivered. For the plastic period (decree 2198 of 2017) that seek most cost-effective native of compliance of 2040-2050 a connection of the SCE is expected to discourage the use of this type of packaging 42. In the voluntary market for "carbon bonds" or their respective goals compensation credits the price formed in the quota market. America and the rest of the world. Taxable taxable can purchase biodegradable emission reductions especially in supermarkets With this it is established to carbon (canceling them in favor of the passive subject of the maximum amount of emissions that can have been discussed and that can meet this imposed at the beginning of the supply chain). East allow according to the required trajectory 41. National Program of Tradable Emission Quotas to meet the goals for the Colombian emissions trading system. tradable issue of the SCE since the former recognizes the those emission rights National Program of Emission Tradable Quotas price of these issues. Meets a double 2 presented in the Solidarity Law Project name that the Climate Change Law (LCC) establishes that the quota or emission right purpose: allows generating incentives to achieve for the emissions trading system of Colombia. to emit a ton of CO2. Sustainable in 2021 as sources of resources 226 227 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments for a new fund to be called the Momentum Fund in the decade from 2030 to 2040 Climate Change and Sustainable Development which would finance specialized mitigation initiatives and adaptation to climate change. The purchase of a percentage by the financiers is expected. Thence that before 2030 they can be considered and marketers. These technologies are integrated structuring and having a national proportion has had little environmental impact and approved to go into operation. in the normal dynamics of non-reimbursable resource markets (contributed by low financial collection (OECD/ECLAC Of electricity. State or by sources of international cooperation 6.3.4.2 Prospective of al) in those production lines that do not reach their review. other market instruments Investment funds for bioeconomies become commercially profitable but are adaptation in the first phase of the strategy sustainable economy and production (new) desirable from the social and environmental point of view before 2030 Renewable energy auctions and it is sought to incentivize. foundations of watershed management policies able (Law 1955 of 2019) This new instrument is proposed with two hydrographic objectives: articulate the necessary elements It is expected that before 2030 the climate change policy program will be created. From 2030 onwards It is a mechanism that promotes contracting to develop goods and services based on the definition of the first lines of production and it is expected that the rates have been adjusted for long-term for projects to generate in biodiversity and obtain funds comple- prioritized. The productive sector and the communities internalize the cost of investments that electrical energy that have a mental capacity to make these initiatives viable. you give it total effective majors in the applied scientific and technological wholesale energy market are required to implement between 8% and 10% or more of productive processes so that in the decade from 2030 to 2040 the electricity sector will be transferred to corporations its purchases come from unconventional sources to achieve a profitable use but it can expand the number of lines and diversify autonomous regional renewable energy sources. This allows respectful of ecosystems and communities Colombia's offer in products derived from monitoring mechanisms there is a significant demand for disarmament roll of such auctions. commercialization including marketing and should consolidate and expand the markets and resources for conservation purposes of the consumer pedagogy. Assume articulated- biodiversity products should represent- watersheds. It is foreseeable that auctions in the medium and mind these complex challenges demand to import a high proportion of exports. The long term continue to be carried out frequently and with a number each time state support or only remain as a mechanism largest number of bidders. By the 2030s a It is then proposed to have a combi to explore new lines of business. According to the legislation 2040 will allow the commitments to compliance with commitments to be minimized or reduced to zero) dispatches of coal-fired power plants that do not have soft financing or risk capital for sewage balance instruments with capture and storage mechanisms - part of the state of charges and benefits to de carbono (IPCC from 2040 to 2050 something similar is expected to happen- by universities or research centers- Rate for use of these activities. The collection is own income of lar with gas thermals. Several of these plants are tigation and a water venture capital component (Law 99 of 1993) regional autonomous corporations and must will continue to exist to ensure trustworthiness. It may also be extended to initiatives to be used for investment projects in disrepair. ility of the system and avoid rationing in sustainable production moments of temporary supply insufficiency. circular that require investment capital and are from natural sources to pay for access to this respective so of an interesting size or that can add resource. The collections for this rate are rents implementation and monitoring of the same rate. According to the prospective scenarios and the garse to attract risk investors. of the environmental authorities that assign the Although these rates have a long tradition goals of the strategy it is expected that by 2030 water concessions and must be allocated prior- they have only been applied to the dumping of matter the proportion of non-conventional sources of For this you can create a fund-type vehicle ity to protection activities and recu- organic and suspended solids to the bodies of renewable energies in the country is around the investment with the support of the development bank peration of hydrographic basins. What's more 30% by 2040 said proportion increases to 60% to financially structure the projects and it is allowed to allocate part of the collections to admin- for emissions to the atmosphere or disposal and from 2050 it stabilizes around attracting private venture capital. In this type of illustrating the application of the instrument 75%. If these scenarios are met 228 229Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments OECD recommends its evaluation to gener- that allow other environmental services to be remunerated. It is expected ar adjustments that allow it to be potentiated in the future such and other types of benefits. The period 2040 Deposit/reimbursement mechanisms- obligation to purchase this insurance by with higher rates and better coverage (OECD/ to 2050 should be a period of stabilization and so for circular economy (new) those public or private economic agents ECLAC It is proposed to create a tax instrument so that its cost is incorporated within the In the next years It is important to carry out conclusive evaluations. Territorial nation (Law 388 of 1997) generate non-biodegradable solid waste. (rates on the effectiveness of the regulations that regulate- I would seek to increase the final price of the good pay rates and performance The instruments necessary to finance (applying a levy). The rate of this tax- 6.3.4.4 Prospective instruments institutional in its application. In this period, urban planning initiatives must issue regulations to broaden the base of were established by Law 388 of 1997 liquidation in vertimientos to the water that real- do the social and ecological function of the property disposed of and for other waste prevalence of the general interest over the particular and lime these "deposits" are collected and the resources and adaptation as rediscount and industrial to cover the social cost of the effects of (Econometrics Consultants health of air emissions at the local level. of the loads and the benefits allows within the productive cycle than the actions carried out on the circular economy habitat. As in general one of It includes the creation of lines of credit with Payment for services of the cities are economically and financially the highest costs are those of collection of the preferential rate conditional on compliance environmental (Law 99 of 1993) viable said actions (Medellin City Hall Payment for environmental services (PES) is a way to return leftover materials incentive that public or private actors two in one environmental service that carry out the effort of conservation or restau- local and qualification of their equi- fund (or an account in an existing fund) earmarked ecosystem ration. One of these services can post technicians on financing issues. In In the period before 2030, the creation of money is expected to finance a part of the interest rate be the regulation of flows and the conservation many of the cases of hydrographic basins for the removal of carbon from the atmosphere. Future generations correct structural flaws- 2030 to 2050 new materials must be incorporated- where the reduction of the financial cost is conditional- payments for environmental services have been related in the design frequently with the regulation of currents and spontaneous of these cities 2 preservation of water sources because Law 99 of implying cost overruns that must be redistributed Catastrophic insurance for infrastructure equivalent or reduction of climate risk 1993 that created the rate for the use of water mentioned above socially in a fair way. They should structure public (new) flags defined for that purpose. I also know nothing of the investments of the projects that used to establish a balanced distribution of charges between It is about regulating the obligation of assured floor as in the commercial one with an instrument Water suppliers (Vivid Economics et al. ca differential of citizens. For this, this coverage of risks in the budgets During the period 2030 to 2040, it is expected that they will have to manage sources of long-term resources consolidation of the mechanism of the result of the applied evaluations can be of national or international origin They will carry out the regulatory adjustments that guarantee that the Public collection instruments have proposed to expand the insurance for an internal diagnosis that allows determining require and should begin to be incorporated have the capacity to be sustained over time- reduce fiscal vulnerability to climate change- if organizational changes are required private resources within the sources of financing. The applicability should also be studied ciation. Although the water rates will be paid by those of these instruments for rural areas not affected by La Niña in 2010-2011, only 7% will be paid by those of information systems private for the benefits they obtain from the use and develop methodologies and application guides losses caused were insured (OECD/ environmental audits of projects of the water 230 231 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments In this period there must be a taxonomy Incentives for alternative energies and in alliance with actors recognized by the Ministry green that allows to clearly establish what type of energy efficiency (Law 1715 of 2015) River of Science of projects may be considered as broad coverage projects as it applies not only to sustainable projects of environmental sustainability. This will be fundamental It is a set of climate financial incentives but for any type of initiative so as to build trust the efficient allocation of incentives private sector to achieve a sustainable expansion- electricity generation through unconventional sources- up to 50% of the investment and deductions for environmental cial in capturing resources for this type of renewable energy (FNCER). In terms- linking doctorates and tax benefits and natural risk management initiatives through green bonds. funding for these incentives 1715 created the Fund for Non-Conventional Energies and In the 2030-2040 period, an increase in Efficient Energy Management (FENOGE) is expected, which receives It is important important in the financing of private projects resources from the wholesale electricity market through joint financing programs and coor- national budget and donations from third parties. use of these incentives. This will allow this- will seek coverage growth in all between development banks with a low FENOGE has the possibility of financing establish the necessary transformation measures the departments and the growth of the funds proportion of direct support with public resources. Totally or partially The period 2040 to 2050 supply and demand for financing. FNCER and EE. Considers the possibility of sharing results and impacts. The period 2030 to 2040 the areas of the agricultural frontier and the work of take risks in capital investments Incentive for rural capitalization direct sions and offer compensated rates (MME for silvopastoral and agro systems - 2017). It also incorporates a set of incentives to increase substantially forestry (currently to be transformed) tax and financial that are directed to 2040 to 2050 a stabilization of the Incentive for insurance would be sought achieve growth in energy generation use of these benefits and It consists of the delivery of a subsidy to cover from renewable energies. the investment dynamics of companies up to 40% of investments the verification of the realization of them are developed through a loan for re-sidation of energy service companies Targeted subsidies with productive approaches such as for exposed households story granted by FINAGRO. It has been used for (ESE) [or Energy Service Companies (ESCO)] that gender for extension to climate risks are an instrument that the implementation of silvopastoral projects including the planting of forage species no technical and economic risks associated with occurrences of possible climatic events such as timber and timber forest species associated with livestock production. It plant- remuneration in the participation on the savings- departmental remuneration rate for the coverage- Depending on the perception of risk of ea to allocate sufficient resources to make feasible ros that are obtained from the improvements of t of the costs of the public extension service those who take them are generally seen by both silvopastoral and agroforestry-energy efficiency projects (UPME stales and smart agriculture vulnerable agricultural producers. For the 2030-2040 period, it is expected that these costs will exist. In particular, it provides for the prior- increasing coverage if part of the a number of ESCOs that implement projections of the poor population In the period up to 2030, energy efficiency must be restructured and in exchange I participate the ICR to strengthen it resource sources public funds from the central level could include finan- This instrument will be strengthened for compliance- compliance or landslides for residential complexes- ciation of multilateral banks and donations of Tax Exemption in projects to long-term climate goals if various social interest housing International cooperation. of Science (CT+I) (Law 633 of 2000 and later) National for the Agricultural Extension Service- harvesting of permanent crops) In the period after 2030, the uaria would be consolidated instrument to encourage new initiatives of This instrument seeks to encourage cos development sustainable agriculture and livestock. of CT+I projects by adaptation companies 232 233Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Community employment incentive 6.3.4.5 Prospective elimination Distortion in the tax base in adaptation to climate change it deals with a monetary incentive to establish adverse incentives to the rural property tax with a gender approach (new) remuneration of the work necessary for the strategy implementation of adaptation measures Access to rural land use has high levels In the implementation of programs of adapt- conditioned to the fulfillment of criteria of As for instruments that are currently of informality and the concentration of the property- climate tion (from generation of knowledge- gender equity. are implemented but that generate ity of the land are among the highest- to the implementation of undesired incentive systems or contrary to the objectives of the world43. The property Gini coefficient early warning) at the community level the development of formal information networks and be designed and implemented in a trans- taking into account that in many cases there are barriers- 2017) The inappropriate use of land is a burden for informal tasks that can generate green jobs in projects of adaptation to change. A prime- cult its immediate dismount. However the communities. However These employment opportunities are presented in international organizations that are compatible with costs compared to long-term policies and strategies. an environment of gender discrimination than employment generation objectives and a time frame to determine the transformations or the harm the possibility of women for gender equality. Then a need for complementary instruments must be carried out 43. Colombia is the fifth country with land ownership access them. Particularly adaptation so many leadership skills 44. It is calculated on the area of private property different organization and communication. The instrument is remunerated for it. of collective territories. 234 235 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments land of the country is dedicated to livestock continuously over the years after only half of said surface as an instrument to smooth the variability and until 2011 the mining companies in the areas it is really suitable for grazing. Domestic price incentives in relation to the unstable border received price discounts for taxes and government subsidies have ility of the international price. However supported the ownership of large estates and as of 2011 an implicit tax collection subsidy is identified that the Government obtains from the land underuse in the land market and the accumulated it of the FEPC at the end of 2018 of 10.6 compared to international levels have been exacerbated. Yes inequalities in tenure tives in the environment. Extensive cattle ranching that year. Subsidy that is estimated to be equivalent to and others eliminated is one of the main causes of deforestation and 2018 at between 8% and 16% on the final price of the and other tax advantages remain soil degradation greenhouse effect and consumption and pollution era. These tax advantages offer incentives of water (OECD/ECLAC fuels in border areas the transparency of the tax system and despite One of the main causes of this situation is the negative environmental impact of these activities are indirect subsidies for inefficient use These benefits consist of VAT exemption of rural land. Few municipalities have tariffs and national taxes on gasoline and the fiscal treatment of the extractive sector have up-to-date cadastral records Due to the high costs of calculating the value, it rewards the most polluting vehicles with other subsidies. The Ministry of Mines and Energy has been sufficiently taken into account. On of the land and to the pressure of local groups for a lower tax base and with a higher rate it assigns fuel quotas with benefits to special These records are not updated. A low system. Since the tax on vehicles does not border municipalities and distributes them between the application of taxes related to modernized property tax the actual commercial value efficient soil and a land market more in account its contribution to emissions at a reduced price. The National Plan for Deforestation, mining and oil (OECD/ECLAC dynamic of the transformation of the forest into grasslands of local atmospheric nantes that affect health would lead to targeting the subsidies from the demand 6.3.4.6 List of instruments low productivity (OECD would imply the collection of the environmental authorities that would correspond to pay for that component currently. In the long run, it would be expected that betting strategy such regional likely to be invested in environmental in the tax for a vehicle should these benefits be redirected towards measures mitigation and adaptation to climate change. have the associated emission factors immersed match motor size Distortion in the tax base and in the age of the vehicle vehicle tax rate the type of energy fuel and clean energy generation. contribute to obtaining benefits that help This in order to comply with the spirit of the law to achieve the goals of different bets. Is the case The tax legislation establishes a tax Implicit subsidies on fuels to promote the development of these areas on motor vehicles whose revenues can be collected and design of the fund to encourage the burning of fossil fuels. incentive to the development of sustainable projects or allocated to the territorial authorities (Law 488 price stabilization using the resources that are collected with some of 1998). The rates of this tax range Tax benefits to instruments between 1.5% and 3.5% of the commercial value of Colombia has a historical tradition of regulating public and private extractive industries that generate employment. vehicle defined annually by the Government liquid fuel prices per National vehicles with the highest commercial value. Having- domestic prices in relation to international- or have received large tax advantages in current and new instruments that are expected Keep in mind that the vehicles have a lower end between 1998 and 2006 commercial value as they are older and therefore 236 237 Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Table 11. Relationship between economic and financial instruments and the bets of the strategy Source: E2050 • Bet 1 Bet 2 Bet 3 Bet 4 Bet 5 Bet 6 Bet 7 Bet 8 Bet 9 Instruments in order Increase capacity Knowledge and Management Production Rural development Cities-region Matrix Mobility and of prioritization Just transition of adaptation comprehensive governance of and sustainable consumption differ- with energy development infrastructure the labor force of the population and the climate biodiversity sustainable ciated by regions urban integral diversified sustainable healthcare system Source of Source of Source of Source of Source of resources Source of resources Source of resources Trading system resources resources resources resources Direct incentive benefit of emissions Benefit Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Benefit source of source of Fountain of resources resources resources Source of Carbon tax Direct incentive Benefit Indirect incentive Indirect incentive resources Direct incentive Indirect incentive Direct incentive Benefit energy incentives Direct incentive Benefit Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive alternatives and EE direct incentive financial incentives Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Benefit Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive (rates tax exemption Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Benefit Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive in CT+I projects Instruments Benefit Source of resources Source of resources Benefit financial law 388 energy auctions Benefit Benefit Direct incentive renewable benefit benefit benefit incentive to Benefit rural capitalization Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Source of Benefit resources fee for Benefit Direct incentive Benefit Direct incentive Benefit water use Incentive direct incentive indirect Payment for services Source of Direct incentive Benefit Source of resources environmental resources Source of Benefit resources Remuneration rate Benefit Direct incentive Benefit Direct incentive Benefit Incentive direct incentive direct 238 239Areas of action for the transition to a Colombia E2050 resilient: referents of ambition and instruments Instruments in oden Bet 1 Bet 2 Bet 3 Bet 4 Bet 5 Bet 6 Bet 7 Bet 8 Bet 9 prioritization source of source of Investment funds resources resources Source of for bioeconomy and Benefit Benefit resources sustainable production Incentive direct incentive direct Source of Resource mechanisms deposit-refund Benefit Benefit Direct Incentive Benefit Benefit for circular economy Direct incentive catastrophic insurance for infrastructure Benefit Direct incentive Benefit Benefit Benefit Benefit Benefit public Insurance incentive Benefit Direct incentive Direct incentive Direct incentive Benefit private climate Employment incentive community Direct incentive Benefit in adaptation to C.C. with a gender approach Source of Fountain of resources resources Other taxes Source of Source of Source of Source of Benefit Source of resources Source of resources environmental resources resources resources resources Direct incentive Direct incentive 6.3.4.7 New instruments that the Government establishes mechanisms for its economic in the long term promotion. Both in this case and in other inno- vacations The economic instruments proposed in this market that are presented document They seek to take advantage of and potentiate the designs of to encourage agents towards self-sustainability alternatives and reduce the fiscal cost. have financing schemes that balance existing and foreseeable policy that already exists and fill regulatory gaps where • When it comes to internalizing environmental costs with those of future generations. still needed. However E2050 will be faced with the future appearance of the following considerations: they channel the resources coming from the agencies • The new taxes that are established of new problems and technological solutions that generate the externality and directly in addition to discouraging adverse activities case An example is the technologies that already exist • Incentives such as subsidies must be delivered and placed in the agents that are affected sas to the E2050 have and are currently very expensive but that they are transferred only when the investment de- or efforts are made to eliminate them expected to be more affordable in the future blue hydrogen carbon capture and storage devices. encourage private agents to do them 100% for their customers The recent Energy Transition Law provides for an account. These, as far as possible, should have other sources that balance the burdens and the benefits. mechanisms for evaluating their impacts. 240 241The way forward for implementation and the update of the E2050 7 From 2021 to 2050 seven presidential terms Congressional rations and seven national plans developmental search for an alternative of adoption and insti- operationalization of the E2050 whose objective is tutionalization of the E2050 that guarantees its generation of enabling conditions for recognition long-term coherence and implementation without this meaning creating new institutional ins- anchorage management elements that compete or supplant the support of skills and information needed existing instruments recognized by the sarias and a management and monitoring structure. different national and subnational actors. so that it has the greatest possible impact and remain current and relevant for the country A) Yes cific since it is not strategic to create a new planning instrument becoming a budget burden and ways manager carrying out potential new tasks uncoordinated from the other instruments • Infuse long-term vision in the policy cough with which the Nation and the governments ca public regional and local build their strategies and private with clear objectives: carbon to respond to the challenges that will continue to bring- neutrality and resilience do climate change. Conversely thematic breadth ral and its aspirational and non-binding nature implementation of the E2050 will seek to permeate decisions with long-term objectives: what multiple plans The path to intersectoral and territorial actions for carbon neutrality and resilience and what should take the long-term vision in their designs to go ahead in order to get there? and actions transformation. This way continue to ambitiously achieve the changes carry out the nine bets of the E2050 and identify- required to achieve carbon neutrality and fy obstacles build the socio-ecological political climate resilience that prevents the achievement of these bets. a 2050 country of these objectives that have become indis- • Redirect economic development implementation thinkable for the survival of humani- territorial and sectoral towards paths com- ity in the face of the climate crisis that the planet is experiencing. It is compatible with climate goals. say on the E2050 as conversion options and the updating of the E2050 to official goals in planning instruments determined at the national level (NDC) 243The way forward for implementation E2050 and the update of the E2050 before the Paris Agreement. Namely how with the fulfillment of each of in the body of the E2050 in its nine bets the next NDCs will gradually fulfill the ob- and forty-eight transformation options. monitoring carbon neutrality targets to 2050. The roadmap for the operationalization of • Inform the implementation and current- the E2050 will have five work blocks and two tracing ization of the other goals of the Objectives stages. The first stage runs from July 2021 to of Sustainable Development regarding December 2022 to carbon neutrality and resilience. what. With the delivery of E2050 to the UNFCCC It goes from formulation to implementation. The • Avoid lock-in or typecasting tec- boot stage seeks to prepare the ground in nological that prevents the mitigation of gases the administrative greenhouse effect and generate stranded assets so that this strategy is accepted by the and capital loss in the investment poor adaptation to climate change by 2022. This stage will last until the end of 2022 Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development inappropriate or harmful technologies. to accompany and advise the new government Ensure that E2050 is formalized in the landscape since it is a planning for during these first months of management. Colombian institutional through a mandatory carbon neutrality climate goals and • Minimize loss and damage through clear legal requirements and an institutional structure that is resilient. the leading institution impacts of climate change by for- Subsequently build the country's resilience. the transverse incidence stage will take place where it is expected to already have an information structure • Show examples of formalized institutional implementation to implement the evaluation and updating of E2050. non-binding rations early how it is possible to approach E2050 with a lead entity formally in charge and sector specific obligations. It is funda- carbon neutrality and re-targeting and with a monitoring structure. Both So far it has not been determined how to mentally articulate the path for the construction Silence with important co-benefits in stages are part of the phase of increased signif- must be the institutional structure to follow- of carbon neutrality and the strengthening of the economic mention of the E2050. After 2026 alternatives are expected. The team created for the formu- of other national strategic exercises to • Make the population aware of the need for the integration of E2050 in the institution will support the transition and the determination to fight against climate change. capacity to undertake great transformations Colombian ity is full and that with the new ones of said institutional structure avoiding any- the Colombian Low Development Strategy in many areas and that the sacrifices updates of the E2050 generate cycles of any hiatus between the approval of the E2050 and the Carbon (ECDBC) to be undertaken pales in comparison to regular planning and advocacy. When will its implementation begin? The structure tion (PNACC) to damage that is mitigated by routing- upgrade the E2050 us on the path indicated by the E2050. NDC izations national development plans and other instruments Climate (SISCLIMA) and also keep in mind that of Climate Change (PIGCC)45 The roadmap for the operationalization of mentos E2050 should be distinguished from planning necessitate annotation that is also expected in the context of the Sustainable Development Goals. The Commission- intersectoral climate change should be of transformation. This roadmap is sent for further guidance from the UNFCCC on the body that can decide in the first place 45. As established in Article 7 of Law 1931 of 2018. to define how to ensure that the E2050 has an impact on the role that long-term strategies must fulfill on this institutional structure and distribution Instruments of the ministries. The Comprehensive Plans of Sectoral Climate Change Management (PIGCCS) cross way instruments to issue guidelines and adopt entities sectors and territories the necessary actions to ensure, within the framework of its that catalyze the changes proposed by the different Parties to the Paris Agreement. The leadership of the E2050 could be in the hands of the competences the fulfillment of the goal of reduction of bets and transformation options. In other National Planning Department due to greenhouse gases at the CICC words with your industry dence focused on how to trigger the trans- work that make up the transversal roadmap par excellence and leads the follow-up neutrality and a high capacity for adaptation in territo- formations posed by the E2050 244 245The way forward for implementation E2050 and the update of the E2050 7.2 Inclusion of Nationally Appropriate Mitigation (NAMA) CONPES and other aligned instruments for adequately long-term planning pursuit of sustainability as the Policy of and being able to periodically update the E2050 Green Growth and the SDGs. For each bet which anchor institutions should be identified years46. In this way respective and encourage them to take on the challenge of tutional that is decided will be necessary then in planning to co-lead this transition towards carbon neutrali- is to articulate the efforts of various entities ity and climate resilience policies and instruments leader of all the E2050. In this way, a cas will be sought and they could be able to generate nodal leadership but accompanied by an appropriate long-term projections sectorial institutional formation for each bet. UPRA to Sinchi in addition permanent external and independent structure establish additional data collection programs of a consultative and advisory nature to fulfill continuous national information to inform the with the functions that it has been performing- E2050. It will be possible to evaluate the relevance of do the E2050 Support Committee and the Committee formally lend these capabilities to the processes of Experts. There are several options for this. such as granting such responsibilities biennial transparency reports and perhaps ties to the National Climate Change Council- even more national communications are co created by Law 1931 of 2018 create an external figure with the participation of advancing the transitions proclaimed by the the academy a kind of 2050 observatory. future updates of the E2050 and the NDC. the first clear incidence challenge for E2050. Equally Regardless of the institutional structure of science and technology for carbon neutrality, national policies and instruments with priorities to be incorporated into said plan. determine legal as well as economic considers it pertinent to formulate a bill decree or a modification of Law 1931 of 2018 on climate change management and thinking about livestock longer term funding sources. He and INNPULSA chosen legal instrument must deal with tative and aspirational the nature of the E2050 as an instrument of Finally planning and lead its implementation this must have against other instruments of and 2026 planning and monitoring framework I lie specific periodicities. no ment of mandatory reference and planning necessary in the short term to On the other hand of having up-to-date climate scenarios other sectoral and territorial instruments 46. As determined by the decisions of the Conference of From the Parties as the Meeting of the Parties to the Paris Agreement all the themes (CMA) on common time frames of the NDCs of the weather forecasts to country penetration forecasts 246 247The way forward for implementation E2050 and the update of the E2050 requirement for a transformation towards the various discussion spaces carbon neutrality and resilience. joint construction of strategies Just Workforce Transition Strategy 4. Actions to avoid so as not to be pigeonholed- included as a commitment in the Colom NDC- capabilities and technology larse in technological lock-in. bia and that Mintrabajo must end by 2023. for resilience 5. Capital investments needed in the short term Later term to generate long-term effects. 2022-2026 and the institution that will lead the E2050 the work of this block may consider climate Not all priorities will have a place in the new planning instruments PND 2022-2026 and of course several must be regulated to make possible transformation options be calibrated depending on the guidelines mation that do not have a policy instrument proposed by the new elected government. This may be necessary in particular do in 2022 sectoral and territorial planning instruments - example of carbon capture technology rial. So this block of work must use and store. Equally tending to the incidence also in others will require work in the creation or adjustment of implementation of the bets of the E2050 Likewise planning instruments. financial or fiscal instruments depending on long-term information on training and research needs of long-term considerations On the other hand updated in December 2020 and delivered In these cases it is prudent to practice the mental analysis for the bets of the E2050 to the UNFCCC in an implementation plan of the same as OECD tions. carbon neutrality and resilience is not just about carbon neutrality and resilience. seeks to take a CONPES document. There I know by the regulations and planning instruments- Immediately afterwards has an opportunity for additional incidence It is also proposed to create guidelines cation of the E2050 of greater ambition in mitigation for the NDC or national programs against objectives than that available to deal with such transfor- human in the country as stated in the transformation options E2050 to determine compatibility with objections and to be able to undertake them successfully. ing or creating training programs for mation between the stated goal of reduction of whether it is included in a legislative act or if enabling conditions for the generation of infor- or generating support programs for lines of information are not met. emissions of 51% by 2030 and the set of measures as good practice in policy development. mation and research mitigation measures included to date in the NDC. give The NDC leaves the door open to new measures Finally of mitigation and the E2050 includes several proposals- calls the E2050 require a good understanding of the costs tas as an option for transformation that the sacrifices and those harmed by such decisions may be considered to officialize as goals of the NDC. This virtuous circle would demonstrate a way to minimize collateral impacts - base information for endogenous climate planning adapted to the Colombian context. the raison d'être of E2050, which is negative reports sea with a vision of carbon neutrality providing alternatives medium-term commitment such as the NDC. reduce resistance to change. This angle of information coverage and keeping it in line with technical regulations and standards (for example, The same can happen with other CONPES that planning are being processed on climate variability economic and energy transition. and territorial needs a careful study if transitions are not managed well it can better decisions by feeding climate services implementation of technologies that aim to in addition it is also achieved by participating in fishing the required changes. climate change. mation of the E2050. 248 249The way forward for implementation E2050 and the update of the E2050 Finally general training on the E2050 designed for the professions and sectors. • Companies: formulation of carbon goals implemented and the private sector to create capacities at the This block of work must have the strong corporate cas technician and manager on what the E2050 means your bets and transformation options for Ministry of Education the country. With that two for implementation in the territories and in information providers and entities • Unions: formulation of car goals- part of this stage the companies sities Colombia Carbon Neutral (ECCN) • Public-private alliances: ac- contribute to advancing in the implementation of 7.4 Implementation collaborative sessions. the NDC 2020 also contribute with the first steps in the • Local communities: actions at the construction level of the E2050 vision betting pioneer landscape and emergence of new practices. private sector actors and institutions of the National Environmental System (SINA) and options of • Schools and colleges: education for individuals. In this way climate and socio-ecological resilience. ta initially for three blocks of work: transformation • Universities: support for inno- 1. National carbon-neutral program technological vacations. trality: having a mechanism to pro- move emissions management of E2050 • Entrepreneurship: start-ups social and technological conditions. public and private the country's commitments established in These pioneering implementers would accompany the NDC and establish organizational commitments. Specific objective: paved in its early execution processes of carbon neutrality. transformation of the E2050. In this way na with advice for the implementation of the Demonstrate with real examples of imple- the bets of the E2050 are raised as possible transformations Mention that the bets of the E2050 are sustainable development ilities that can from the experiences feasible and beneficial learned for scaling them. as a transformation that must occur from accompaniment, it may consist of advice from the central SINA to be a model of the national scale. the formulation of carbon neutrality management goals for the other sectoral entities Since the E2050 seeks to generate a business culture and its implementation. ales of government In the medium and long term of long-term planning in order to fight Pioneering implementers can be of this component can be expanded to cover against climate change and adapt to it It is necessary to show pertinent advances in the early way they implement bets and public policy in a controlled way and public documents of national and local order. short term and also at local scales so that transformation options of the E2050 citizens see the need and feasibility of could be the following examples: transformation options and derive lessons 3. Individual carbon footprint management begin now the necessary transformations for a larger-scale implementation. bonus: establish mechanisms so that saries for carbon neutrality and resilience. • Municipalities and departments: actions and every Colombian is able to To do this, it seeks to use entities leading and pioneering territories and organizations that policy experiments will allow to show to greenhouse implement early transformations • Public entities: policies- success stories to encourage rapid implementation- these and how to manage them help- mations pointed out in the bets and cas options of public purchases. Mention of transformation options do thus combat climate change. 250 251The way forward for implementation E2050 and the update of the E2050 7.5 Communication and transition management Specific goal: Position and keep current the E2050 success stories of implementation in Colom- as a long-term plan that should be commit the Colombian State and all your citizenship It activates the natural resistance that will be had to co-benefits of actions such as many of the necessary transformations the use of electric vehicles or the adoption of for carbon neutrality and resilience. precision farming practices with savings significant loss of water and fertilizers. The expectation The E2050 requires a continuous effort to ensure that Colombian public opinion is position before public opinion and educate them more and more on these issues. decision makers about issues of transition towards carbon neutrality and On the other hand resilience The large number of topics covered by the cough E2050 mation sionar to audiences in a simplified way what disasters and adaptation to climate change is found in each of these bets. as in the same reduction of emissions and reducing vulnerability factors In a first stage get involved in the face of and at the COP26 in November will generate strategic communications that from 2021 nationals. Information on the web in social networks and media articles academic and informative on the E2050 for assessing the transformations to be undertaken to The positioning of the E2050 agenda its topics part of recognized spokespersons will be ingredients- multiple scales and in diverse contexts and may have a peak with the climate launch and social transformations important aspects of this positioning. set calls for early action do to multiple audiences. UNFCCC should also Later more specific highlighting specific bets that involve sacrifices of various kinds of the E2050 and its transformation options as well as the advances that are being achieved economic fication and retraining of the may become an obligatory reference given that disinformation in matters of public policy. The pioneers of the labor force to move from carbon economies- the matter and educational and informative tool- sensationalist implementation will be very useful to show non-intensive carbon neutrals. It will reach many audiences. Give the truthful information. 252 253Literature Cited 8 A clay 2014: Impacts Part B: Regional Aspects.  Cambridge Univer- Medellin's town hall. (2006). City Press document. https://www.cambridge.org/core/ POT support technician [Agreement 46/2006]. books/climate-change-2014-impacts-adap- Secretary of Municipal Planning. https://www. tation-and-vulnerability-part-b-regional-as- medellin.gov.co/irj/go/km/docs/documents/Servi- pects/036A899BD52861D61B0D519C5F2B9334 ciosLinea/Municipal Planning/ObservatoryPo- liticasPublicas / resultsFollow-up / docs / pot / Berkes Documents / instruments.pdf duction. In F. Berkes Navigating socialecological systems: Building ANDI. (2019). Baseline of the food situation- resilience for complexity and change. cambridge taria and nutritional of childhood in Colombia ANDI. http://www.andi.com.co/Uploads/Línea%20 base% 20de% 20la% 20situación% 20alimentar- Berkes ia%20y%20nutricional%20de%20la%20niñez%20 sociological and ecological systems: manage- en%20Colombia%20-%202019.pdf  ment practices and social mechanisms for build- ing resilience.  Cambridge University Press. Andrade at A. flycatcher IN. it towards sustainability. Biodiversity management of public and institutional policy in the framework ity in the processes of change in the territory of Colombia's long-term strategy for Colombian mainland. Research Institute carbon neutrality and adaptation - E2050. tion of Biological Resources Alexander von Long-Term Climate Strategy of Colom- Humboldt. http://repository.humboldt.org.co/bia (E2050). Ministry of Environment and Development handle/20.500.11761/35145 Sustainable. Andrade Perez C than ecosystemic in Latin America. CEM. B CAIA Engineering. (2021). Options Analysis to increase gas absorption greenhouse effect in Colombia in the framework of World Bank. (2021a). Gini index (World Bank long-term strategy – E2050. Strategy Literature estimate) – Colombia [data]. The World Bank. Long Term Climate of Colombia (E2050). https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SI.POV. Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development. GINI?locations=CO Calvente quoted World Bank. (2021b). Poverty gap at $3.20 atative. Interamerican Open University. day (2011 PPP) (%) – Colombia [datos]. The World  http://www.sustentabilidad.uai.edu.ar/pdf/cs/ Bank. https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/ UAIS-CS-200-004% 20-% 20Renovacion% 20 SI.POV.LMIC.GP?locations=Adaptive CO.pdf 255E2050 Literature Cited D tions/newsletters/specials/education/Bol_ Equidad. National Planning Department. edu_2019.pdf https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/Prensa/ Cambridge Dictionary. (s. f.). Trade off. En  BasesPND2018-2022n.pdf Cambridge Dictionary. https://dictionary. DANE. (2018a). How many are we? National Census- DANE. (2020c). Multidimensional Poverty - cambridge.org/es/dictionary/english/trade-off nal Population and Housing 2018 – Colombia Results - July 14, 2020. DANE. https:// DWS. (2020 [data]. https://www.dane.gov.co/index.php/ www.dane.gov.co/files/investigaciones/ climatic condition and profitability. Investment. https:// Carpenter Abel ment: Resilience of what to what? Ecosystems 765-781. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10021-001-0045-9 Danley AND DANE. (2018b). Resultados Colombia - Total  conceptual definitions of ecosystem services Cider. (2021). Analysis of National instruments. National Population Census and Vivi- and their implications. Ecological Economics territorial and environmental planning in the enda framework 2018 – Colombia [data]. https://www. ics of the Long-Term Strategy of Colombia for dane.gov.co/files/censo2018/infografias/info-CN- con.2016.04.003 Econometrics Consultants. (2013). Evaluation carbon neutrality and adaptation. Univer-PC-2018total-nal-colombia.pdf of the impact of Law 388 on the prices of sity of the Andes. https://cider.uniandes.edu. By Rosnay co/en/bulletins/bulletin-112/analysis-instrument- DANE. (2019a). Self-recognition Population global vision. SEUIL. of the soil in the main cities of the country. tos-planning-territorial-environmental-carbo- Black non-neutrality-strategy-2050 Commission I Denton political control debate Chamber on CNPV 2018. DANE. https://www. Burton Collins stone Grove in the J. more work for long-term social-ecological research. Colombia. Levy National Census Results Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 351-357. https://doi.org/10.1890/100068 dane.gov.co/files/investigaciones/boletines/ Adaptation ethnic-groups/presentation-ethnic-groups-by- Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group CONPES 3919 of 2018 (March 23) National CA for Green Buildings. Internal Panel on Climate Change (pp. 1101-based Solutions. Technical Handbook 1. UNaLab. https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/Conpes/ DANE. (2019c). Indigenous Population of Colombia. 1131). Cambridge University Press. Econ%C3%B3micos/3919.pdf Results of the National Population Census and Etter Housing 2018. DANE. https://www.dane.gov.co/ National Planning Department. (2015). State of Colombian ecosystems. CONPES 3990 of 2020 (March 31) bia Sustainable Bioceanic Power 2030. presentation-ethnic-groups-2019.pdf well-being and peace. Mission for Ecosystem Transformation - IUCN. IUCN. http://www.cco.gov.co/docs/publicaciones/ del campo. https://colaboracion.dnp.gov.co/CDT/ conpes-2020-04-27.pdf DANE. (2020a). Technical Bulletin National Accounts-Agriculture, Livestock, Forestry%20and%20Fishing/ F Annual Finals 2018 provisional. DANE. https:// The%20CAMPO%20COLOMBIAN%20A%20 Costanza R. I. M.. (2017). Twenty years of ecosystem services:  uales-2018provisional.pdf  Flórez How far have we come and how far do we still National Planning Department. s. need to go? Ecosystem Services https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoser.2017.09.008 DANE. https://www.dane.gov.co/files/investi-2018-2022 - Pact for Colombia natives of Colombia. Colombian Biota 256 257E2050 Literature Cited The United Nations on Climate Change I 17(1) handle/20.500.11761/9352 Basic concepts to rethink the problem- gov.co/openbiblio/bvirtual/023731/TCNCC_ environmental ca. Management and Environment IMF. (2019). Colombia. Technical Report: Reform of https://revistas.unal.edu.co/index.php/gestion/ Levin Energy Prices. Internal Monetary Fund- article/view/39572 IDEAM. (2018). Second Biennial Report of bre). What Does "Net-Zero Emissions" Mean? 6 tional. https://www.imf.org/~/media/Files/Publica- Colombia update to the Convention Common Questions tions/CR/2019/Spanish/1COLSA2019004.ashx  Gunderson Peterson People Social-Ecological Systems. En V. Galaz (Ed.) al Challenges 24-37). Edward Elgar Publishing. IDEAM. (2019a). National Water Study 2018. December). COP21 Glossary of Terms Guid- IDEAM. http://documentacion.ideam.gov.co/ ing the Long-term Emissions-Reduction Goal. H People P. Daily T. lom Polasky to the Biosphere. AMBIO springer.com/article/10.1007/s13280-011-0184-y  tions. Global Environmental Change doi.org/10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2020.102097 sos natural renewable form ogy of Landscapes and Regions. Cambridge  Holling University Press. ity of economic Ecosystems article/10.1007/s10021-001-0101-5 Engineer. (2021). Risk study due to the effects of G Climate Change and Adaptation Measures for Law 1523 of 2012 (April 24) Long-Term Strategy E2050 of Colombia – Phase t of the national risk management policy of I 1. Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development. disasters and the National System is established GAVE. (2021). premium biofuels second and third generation. https://www. INVEMAR. (2017). Final technical report of other provisions. Official Gazette 48411. http:// gave.es/biocombustibles-de-primera-according- IDEAM. (2015). New scenarios of change coastal marine vulnerability analysis before the www.secretariasenado.gov.co/senado/basedoc/ day-and-third-generation/climate for Colombia 2011-2100: climate change tools for the country. INVEMAR. law_1523_2012.html science for decision making. Focus Girod do policies for efficient energy use in the house- al de cambio Climático. https://n9.cl/2m8jo.  Ipbes. https://ipbes.net/glossary/natures-contri- J. hold sector induces energy-efficiency innovation? butions-people National monitoring and follow-up program An evaluation of European countries. Jan- IDEAM. (2016). National Inventory and Department of soil and land degradation in gy Policy TO enpol.2016.12.054 bia. Third National Communication of Change documents/11769/153422/Additionally+with- Climate. IDEAM. http://documentacion.ideam. sulte_C2-C-RE-Sánchez%2C+R.pdf/d5a21efa-18e7- Global Gender and Climate Alliance. (2016).  gov.co/openbiblio/bvirtual/023634/INGEI.pdf 486c-b925-80560ae91b3c Gender and Climate Change: a closer look at exist- Kumar ing evidence. OAK Foundation. https://wedo.org/ IDEAM. (2017). Tercera Comunicación Nacio- Ecosystems and Biodiversity Ecological and  Loorbach wp-content/uploads/2016/11/GGCA-RP-FINAL.pdf nal de Colombia a La Convención Marco De  Economic Foundations. Earthscan. F. (2017). Sustainability Transitions Research: 258 259E2050 Literature Cited Ecosystem-based Transforming Science and Practice for Societal to Climate Change Change. Annual Review of Environment and in Colombia. Ministry of Environment. https:// Moore Resources annurev-environ-102014-021340 uploads / 2020/07 / MADS_Guia_AbE_LIBRO_Digi- P. y Biggs tal-Cambio.pdf  of change: toward an analytical framework for  Ostrom understanding deliberate social-ecological trans- for Analyzing Sustainability of Social-Ecolog- M Ministry of Environment and Development formations. Ecology and Society Sustainable. (2021). Contribution update- org/10.5751/ES-06966-190454 edisciplinas.usp.br/pluginfile.php/4507355/ Nationwide Determination of Colom- mod_resource/content/1/i_709ab6a5/ Colombia Country Brand. (2021). How is the orgy (NDC). Ministry of Environment and Development Mosquera political-administrative organization of Colombia? Sustainable. https://www4.unfccc.int/sites/ndcstag- Collective territories and biodiversity. In M.ing_sustainability_of_social.pdf Colombia.co. https://www.colombia.co/pais-co- ing/PublishedDocuments/Colombia%20First/ Gómez lombia/estructura-del-estado-colombiano/ NDC%20actualizada%20de%20Colombia.pdf Biodiversity 2015. State and Trends of the P how-is-the-political-administrative-organization- Continental Biodiversity of Colombia. Institute va-de-colombia/ Ministry of Commerce (2020). Macroeconomic context of Colombia. humboldt.org.co/assets/docs/2015/4/406/biodi- Metz M. and Meyer Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage. 46ec-b2a1-56513399bd09/Colombia.aspx vation and its articulation with education O Cambridge University Press. and public awareness within the framework of the Ministry of Mines and Energy. (2017). Manu- long-term strategy of Colombia for the Ministry of Environment and Development to the FENOGE operation. Ministry of Mines and carbon neutrality and adaptation. Strategy Sustainable and Humboldt Institute. (2013). Energy. OECD. (2013). Roadmap for the accession of Long Term Climate of Colombia (E2050). Cartography 2013 of the Paramos of Colom- Colombia to the OECD Convention (Adopted Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development. bia: Diversity Inter-administrative Association http://www.humboldt.org.co/es/actualidad/ national productive sector and generate 80% of the ment/C(2013)110/FINAL/en/pdf Portafolio.https://www.portafolio.co/ economy/ item/109-new-cartography-of-the-for-employment in Colombia”: Minister Alicia Arango. finances/colombia-1990-2008-218394 mos-de-colombia-diversidad-territorio-e-historia Ministry of Labor. https://www.mintrabajo. OECD. (2015). OECD Economic Surveys: Colom- gov.co/prensa/comunicados/2019/septiembre/ bia 2015. OECD Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1787/ R Ministry of Environment and Development mipymes-representan-mas-de-90-del-sec- eco_surveys-col-2015-en Sustainable. (2011). Zoning of areas of tor-productive-national-y-generan-el-80-del-em- mangrove swamp. Minambiente.gov. https://www. plea-in-colombia-minister-alicia-arango OECD. (2014). OECD Environment minambiente.gov.co/images/BosquesBio- Performance Reviews: Colombia 2014. Rockström diversity and Ecosystem Services / pdf / Ministry of Housing. (2020). Cities 4.0 OECD Publishing. https://www.oecd.org/ are Manglares/080811_zonificación_manglares.pdf A bet towards equitable development. Minis-environment/country-reviews/oecd-envi-M. Housing Territory Ministry of Environment and Development bia-2014-9789264208292-en.htm Rodhe Sustainable. (2012). National Policy for Monterrosa Blanco Comprehensive Management of Biodiversity and its Servi- Mipymes represent 96% of the business fabric- UN. (2015). Address climate change. Objective space for humanity. Nature Ecosystem Services (PNGIBSE). Alexanial Institute and contribute 40% to GDP. The Republic. https:// you of Sustainable Development. https://www.un.org/ www.nature.com/articles/461472a that of Humboldt. http://www.humboldt.org.co/ www.larepublica.co/economia/mipymes-rep- sustainabledevelopment/es/climate-action/ images/pdf/PNGIBSE_espa%C3%B1ol_web.pdf resentan-96-del-tejido-empresarial-y-apor- Rojas tan-40-al-pib-2903247 Ortiz Ministry of Environment and Development Caribbean Coast Sustainable. (2018). EbA 260 261E2050 Literature Cited Columbia (E2050). Ministry of Environment and Steffen Sustainable development. Cornell Carpenter RUNAP. (2020). Gerten National System Protected Areas - SINAP. National Parks - Ramanathan Natural nals of Colombia. https://www. Planetary boundaries: Guiding human develop- Long Term Climate of Colombia (E2050). systems: fundamentals parquesnacionales.gov.co/portal/es/sistema-na- ment on a changing planet. Science cional-de-areas-protegidas-sinap/ https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1259855 UPME. (2021b). Plan of expansion of IN AROUND. (2020). RUNT in digits. Around. https: // www. Suescún runt.com.co/runt-en-cifras The scandalous inequality of property siel.gov.co/Inicio/Generaci%C3%B3n/Planesde- countryside in Colombia. Public Reason. https:// Expansi%C3%B3nGeneraci%C3%B3nTransmis- razonpublica.com/la-escandalosa-desigual- i%C3%B3n/tabid/111/Default.aspx  Walker S dad-de-la-propiedad-rural-en-colombia/  ing: Sustaining Ecosystems and People in UPME. (2018). First balance of Useful Energy Changing World. Island Press. Solomon Sanchez-Zamora thin analysis of rural territorial dynamics: A lime Science Basis. Cambridge University Press. approach to the concept through a UPME approach. (2021a). National Energy Plan 2020 WRI and New Climate Economy. (2021). Holistic territorial. Rural Development Notebooks U 93-116. https://doi.org/10.11144/Javeriana.cdr13-77. ita sustainable development”. UPME. http://www1. Areas of Intervention (Betting) in Colombia’s nrad upme.gov.co/DemandayEficiencia/Documents/ Long-Term Strategy for Decarbonization. Estrate- PEN_2020_2050/Plan_Energetico_Long-Term Climate Nation of Colombia (E2050). SOU. (2013). Making the value of ecosystems IUCN (2014). Management Use Guidelines al_2020_2050.pdf Ministry of Environment and Sustainable Development. services visible. Proposals to enhance well-being Ex situ for the Conservation of Species of the through biodiversity and ecosystem services. WWF Species Survival Commission. (2019 V Swedish Government Official Report. IUCN. IUCN Species Survival Commission. https:// know and how we can end the white- portals.iucn.org/library/sites/library/files/documentation of corals. Discover WWF. Stockholm Resilience Centre. (2012). Interac- ments/2014-064-Es.pdf https://www.worldwildlife.org/descubre-wwf/ tion between social and ecological feedbacks  Vesna can lock systems into unsustainable pathways creating social-ecological traps. Stockholm Resil- tions based on Nature. https://www. nomic towards whole society perspective on corals#:~:text=La%20principal%20causa%20 ience Centre.  https://issuu.com/getresilient/docs/ iucn.org/sites/dev/files/iucn_issues_brief_-_nbs_ energy efficiency market. Renewable and  del%20blanqueamiento insights_social-ecological_traps_111108  standard_esformatted.pdf  Sustainable Energy Reviews https://econpapers.repec.org/scripts/redir. Stockholm Resilience Centre. (2018). UNFCCC. (2021). What is the Paris Agreement? pf?u=https%3A%2F%2Fdoi.org%2F10.1016%252Fj. X Social-ecological traps: Understanding the  United Nations Framework Convention on  rser.2016.12.002;h=repec:eee:ren- inter actions between poverty and environ- Climate Change. https://unfccc.int/es/process- sus:v:70:y:2017:i:c:p:968-975 mental degradation. GRAID. https://graid.earth/ and-meetings/the-paris-agreement/el-acuer- wp-content/uploads/2018/05/4.-SUNI-204-Brief-do-de-paris Virapongse %E2%80%93-Social-ecological-traps.pdf  M. UNGRD. (2018). Risk Atlas of Colombia: social-ecological systems approach for environment- for the G20. Asian Development Bank. Stacey Organizational Dynamics: The challenge of nal for Disaster Risk Management. Management complexity. Pearson Education. jenvman.2016.02.028 structure-future.pdf 262 263Anexos 9 9.1 Tale: "Winds of change: An history about Carbon Neutrality” story to bring an interested public closer children (children in basic primary education) maria) deep transformations that promotes the E2050 for Colombia Español English Attachments Download here Download here 265E2050 Attachments 9.2 List of studies d. Analysis of public policy instruments and institutional framework within the Strategy support elaborated Colombia's long-term for carbon neutrality and adaptation E2050. For the construction of the E2050 e. Analysis of options to increase absorption of greenhouse gases nadero of Colombia in the framework of the These documents can be consulted at: Long-term climate strategy E2050. www.e2050colombia.com Analysis of planning instruments F. territorial and environmental ification in the framework of the long-term strategy of Colombia for carbon neutralization to. ity and adaptation. Evaluation of the neutrality pathways of carbon for Colombia through the robust decision-making methodology Prospective analysis of the instruments rates (RDM) in various future scenarios of Science uncertain using the GCAM model. g. its articulation with education public awareness in the framework of the Colombia's long-term strategy for the carbon neutrality and adaptation E2050. b. Risk study due to the effects of climate change and measures Prospective analysis of the instruments adaptation for long-term strategy economic and financial data in the term E2050 of Colombia h. framework of the long-term strategy of Colombia for carbon neutralization ity and adaptation E2050. c. Assessment of possible effects Analysis for mainstreaming of the mitigation goals of the gender approach in tion following the results of formulation of the Strategy for the GCAM-RDM models. i. Colombian long term. 266 267E2050 C O L O M B I A Colombia's long-term climate strategy E2050 to comply with the Paris Agreement