MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES www.marn.gob.gtPRINT 2021P STRATEGY 4 Cover Letters FROM NATIONAL 13 1. Executive Summary WITH GROWTH 14 2. Introduction LOW EMISSIONS 17 3. The Process OF GREENHOUSE GASES GREENHOUSE 20 4. Baseline 22 5. Sector Summary 22 1. Energy Sector: Generation and consumption 29 2. Transport and Urban Development Sector 34 3. Industry Sector 40 4. Agriculture and Livestock Sector 45 5. Forest sector and other land uses 50 6. Solid and liquid waste 55 6. Integration of Policy Options 56 7. Impact of the Strategy 57 8. Route to Follow 62 9. Attachments National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 34 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases (Transcript) Foreword Guatemala is a country aware of the importance of climate action; and matic; thus We (MARN) have committed to ensuring the protection of the micro and macroeconomic system; and cost estimation. I also know environment fight against the adverse effects of climate change priority of Government Policy and in order to focus our public tor efforts at the national level and comply with international and academic commitments with the accompaniment and validation of the process by nals. part of the MARN United States of America Agency for International Development Guatemala is a multi-ethnic country towards various systemic; is one of the most vulnerable countries to the effects The ENDBE is a guide of technical guidelines of global climate change; its contribution in terms of the potential for the reduction of GHG emissions and the associated costs. global emissions of greenhouse gases -GHG- however the established goal of limiting the increase in temperature of the most competitive and efficient productive systems in the country. planet below 2 degrees centigrade (Celsius) relative to tion to the pre-industrial stage United Nations Framework on Climate Change meet the goal assumed in the Paris Agreement. cleaner bio climate Considering these commitments National Development Program with Low Emissions -ENDBE- (LEDS acronym in English) critical climate change in achieving nally Determined reduction targets; and of GHG emissions. During the EN-Climate formulation process. DBE diagnosis and identification of actors from all sectors of the country GHG emissions Minister The prioritized sectors are: Agriculture; Cattle raising; Forest; Use Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources and Land Use Change; Energy; Transport; Industry; Urbanis- National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 56 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases (Transcript) Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Guatemala The Government of Guatemala has signed and ratified various agreements As a complement to this effort and in order to comply with the on the environment and climate change The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change is actively involved in the process of formulating the Development Strategy. Climate (UNFCCC) Through these agreements, the country promotes the implementation of a planning instrument coherent with the policies climate change adaptation and mitigation actions through the country's public authorities and that articulates the implementation of instruments of the contributions determined at the national level under the principle for the achievement of the following results: a) an economic growth of common but differentiated responsibilities and in accordance with co low in emissions their current capabilities. of competitiveness sustainable under this principle of the United Nations on Climate Change Nationally Determined Contribution1 (NDC in English) by 2030 an 11% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions over two years greenhouse gas (GHG) with respect to its emissions trend based on carried out in an open and participatory manner a constant growth between the years 1990 to 2005. This development effort of the country and supporting the fulfillment of the objectives implies a reduction of up to 6 million tons of dioxide particular to each sector present. of carbon (CO ) equivalent per year by 2030. 2 In that sense Within the framework of these commitments Natural Courses -MARN- since its creation has promoted this strategy policies for the improvement of productive processes and instruments for the adaptation and mitigation of climate change competitiveness and for the achievement of sustainable development low in at the national level National Climate Change Policy the National Action Plan for Adaptation and Mitigation to Change Climate. further policies and instruments related to environmental management and Ing. Agr. Carlos Walberto Ramos Salguero comprehensive management of natural resources whose impacts will help the Vice Minister of Natural Resources and Climate Change improve the efforts that the country currently promotes to adapt- Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources address and mitigate climate change. 1 Intended Nationally Determined Contributions (INDC) 2 Framework law to regulate the reduction of vulnerability National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 78 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases (Transcript) Ministry of Economy Guatemala Dear Guatemalans effort made by the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources Within the framework of the economic policy 2016-2021 meet the challenges that allow economic growth inclusiveness yent and sustainable in an increasingly globalized and technical world. theme it United States for International Development (USAID) It is in this context that Guatemala has developed policies and opportunities to improve competitiveness strategies to promote productivity and competitiveness in a participation of different actors of Guatemalan society global market of Competitiveness 2018-2032 the productive sector will qualification of human capital of development for all Guatemalans. I take this opportunity to invite all sectors to Added to this pressing the National Quality Policy improve the conditions of national and international trade Helping the competitiveness of companies and the protection of the Sincerely consumers standardization conformity assessment procedures. Jose Ramon Lam Ortiz Vice Minister Investment and Competition Ministry of Economy National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions 9Acronyms and Acronyms BID GEI PANCC Inter-American Development Bank Greenhouse gases National Action Plan for Adaptation and Climate Change Mitigation CMNUCC LED United Nations Framework Convention Light Emitting Diode GDP Nations on Climate Change Gross Domestic Product ITSELF CH4 Ministry of Agriculture Methane and Food United Nations Program for the Developing CO MARN 2 Carbon dioxide Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources PRONACOM National Competitiveness Program CO and MEM 2 Equivalent carbon dioxide Ministry of Energy and Mines SEGEPLAN Secretary of Planning and CNCC MICIVI Programming of the Presidency National Climate Change Council Ministry of Communications Infrastructure and Housing TGCO2e CONAP Teragrams of carbon dioxide equivalent National Council of Protected Areas MINECO Ministry of Economy USAID INAB United States Agency for National Institute of Forests MINFIN International Development Ministry of Finance INB gross domestic product NO 2 Nitrous oxide THEN Expected and Determined Contributions at the national level 10 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases12 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse GasesEmissions will be built on the existing political frameworks and 1. Executive Summary according to the development priorities of the different economic sectors. nomic. The active participation of public and private representatives The Low Emissions Development Strategy for Guatemala, two from each sector, became the main strength of the process. formulated with the leadership of the Government of Guatemala and the participation of the formulation of the Strategy training and effective articulation of representatives of the public sector private sector cooperatives and organized groups. For two years of planning already underway. tion farm and livestock and forests quality of life of the population mico greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. this scenario tions The strategy construction of individual application tools tional the economy small production access to international markets and new sources and mechanisms Emissions for Guatemala. of financing. With that climate change and compliance with commitments This document summarizes the Low Emissions Development Strategy of the country acquired before the United Nations Framework Convention and its components on Climate Change (UNFCCC) sets the goal of reducing its GHG emissions by 11% for the year nes of mitigation by sector and the results of the economic analyses. 2030 with own resources and an additional 11% with the assistance of the micos made on the 43 options–an important component International cooperation. of the Strategy that provides information on how much it reduces each option in GHG emissions With the leadership of the Ministry of Environment and Monetary Natural Resources related to its implementation and how each (MARN) Planning and Programming of the Presidency (SEGEPLAN) coordination with the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM) of Agriculture Communications National Institute of Protected Areas (CONAP) and the National Institute of firewood consumption and within the agricultural sector with agro- Forests (INAB) National Development Strategy with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions 13forestry. The results of the analyzes summarized here already take into account the Low Emissions Development Strategy that begins in account for any overlap within and between sectors ble accounting of both emissions and economic flows. The initiatives aimed complete designs of each of the 43 mitigation options are advanced in a coordinated manner in compliance with the presented within the technical document of the Strategy describes in greater detail the co-benefits of each initiative going in relation to climate change adaptation and reduction provides further inputs to existing efforts of vulnerability. the micro and macroeconomic analyzes that are carried out and with an assessment of its potential to reduce greenhouse gas emissions The Government of Guatemala appreciates the time tion of all the participants from the different sectors in the process with greater technical support for decision-making in the framework formulation of the Development Strategy with Low Emissions for the development of the country. what a more competitive Guatemala where economic activities become more efficient mitigating the country's economy. The model proposed for Guatemala It has the characteristic of reducing GHG emissions generated by 2. Introduction different activities tion of climate change. The main objective of a strategy In the year 2015 of the United Nations on Climate Change (UNFCCC) proposed Contribution Expected and Determined at the National Level Figure 1. (INDC) with its own means in 11% its total emissions by 2030 and to have the support of the international community 22% reduction compared to its emissions trend based on development: K’atun Nuestra Guatemala 2032 in a constant growth between the years of 1990 to 2005. With development under five priority axes the signing and ratification of the Paris Agreement by the State on environmental management and climate change issues to promote the Guatemala be a commitment of the country before the international community in the Climate Change Law global efforts to mitigate climate change and combat its among government negative impacts. to adopt practices that create conditions to reduce the vulnerability and allow the development of mitigation proposals. Tam- Guatemala does not start from scratch to fulfill this commitment due to an existing political-legal framework and many policy initiatives such as the National Climate Change Action Plan focused on the issue of climate change. The formulation process (PANCC) and the National Energy Plan. 14 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions Figure 1 Decoupling of economic growth from GHG emissions. A low-emission development strategy is an opportunity to contribute to development environmentally and climatically friendly environment. The Low Emissions Development Strategy to this political-legal framework it also complements the planning frameworks of the six climate change sectors main res covered in it (Figure 2). This document tion prioritized also respond to the main axes of presents a description of the formulation process of said es- adaptation raised in the National Action Plan of trategia Adaptation and Mitigation to Climate Change. The options sector-level mitigation options mitigation tions will make it possible to address adaptation goals economic and in terms of reducing GHG emissions tation in marine-coastal areas will favor decision-making based on analyzed information farming discussed and agreed on in a participatory and multisectoral manner. something the resilience of a low GHG emissions economy. National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 15 Figure 2 Political-legal framework for the Strategy for Development with Low Emissions This document constitutes a outreach tool on process and its results ment to the technical document more de- carving of the Development Strategy llo with Low Emissions that contains more information about the lines basis of each sector and its sources of information mitigation direct benefits and description of co-benefits on social issues economic and environmental adaptation to climate change and vulnerability reduction. 16 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions Figure 3 3. Formulation process of the Low Emissions Development Strategy The Process The process of formulating the Development Strategy with Ba- jas Emissions for Guatemala is a planning exercise with long-term vision (20-30 years) local actors. Through this process the route is established for achieve the objectives and development goals set by each sector investment rare income and cope with climate change. The Strategy formulation process starts from the leadership and di- direction of the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MARN) Ministry of Economy (MINECO) and the Secretariat of Planning and Programming of the Presidency (SEGEPLAN). MARN and SEGE- PLAN as secretariat of the National Climate Change Council are in charge of monitoring the plans and programs of action in mitigation and adaptation to climate change CO as the governing body in economic matters in production systems and technologies green businesses compatible with the environment and with the policies of climate change. For the construction of this Strategy according to the economic activities that generate GHG emissions being these: 1. Energy Sector: Generation and consumption 2. Transport Sector 3. Industry Sector 5. Agriculture and Livestock Sector 4. Forest Sector and Other Land Uses 6. Solid and liquid waste sector National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 17Each working group was led by government agencies The issue of urban development is important in Guatemala due to the cre- that regulate activities in the sector participation of the Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM) Communications of Agriculture Forestry (INAB) and the National Council of Protected Areas (CONAP) private agricultural producers peasants and indigenous peoples. Objective Session Under the premise of the principles applied to the process: transparency ence 1 • Formation of working groups. six working sessions were held for each sectoral group • Introduction to the process following a methodology that established clear objectives and goals to expected results. achieve in each session. • Preliminary baseline review (inventory and emissions projections). The working groups established the base line of emissions of GHG of its sector through a participatory feedback exercise • Elaboration of the vision of the sector. mentation and adjustment 2 • Analysis of the preliminary catalog of options scenarios. From this baseline, the goals were defined. of mitigation. tions • Analysis and validation of the matrix of criteria for and reduce GHG emissions. after each session selection and prioritization of mitigation options. participants had a feedback period to send their contributions to the information presented during the session. In addition to 3 • Presentation and review of the list of options the consultation mechanisms established within the methodology of of mitigation prioritized by the sector. the working groups • Review of the table of contents for the design of counterparts and groups interested in the different topics mitigation options. that the considerations of these actors be taken into account within of mitigation options. 4 • Review and validation of mitigation options designed. Intermediate sessions were included regional public consultations coordinated with departmental committees 5 • Review and validation of the microeconomic analysis of climate change n participants. The process also included a working group in where cross-cutting energy issues were analyzed transport in a context of urban development. 18 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases Figure 5 Participation model of the process As a result of the process of formulating the Strategy, - 43 mitigation options designed different valuable tools for planning and implementa- tive tion of actions that promote a cleaner economic development and resilient to climate change. For some of the options - Economic analyzes of the 43 mitigation options proposals, an analysis of gender and social inclusion was carried out ensure that the proposals presented are of benefit to all GHG reduction and the expected impact on the economy. the population. my Guatemalan - GHG emissions baseline carries from the earth National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 19with Low Emissions 4. Baseline rations used for sectoral and national planning. During the initial phase of the process, the baseline of emissions was constructed. The National Institute of Statistics projects that by the year 2050 the GHG emissions for the country the national emissions inventory. This baseline was developed - it is an important variable to project GHG emissions da using the GHG estimation methodology proposed by him is a driver in energy and resource uses. In accordance with Intergovernmental Panel of Experts on Climate Change (IPCC information from the Bank of Guatemala for its acronym in English) local and secondary sources to fill in information gaps. the mid-2000s and is expected to continue to rise. is projected in addition current behavior and actions already planned without doing any- until 2050. no modification (BAU). Factors such as population growth and the According to the data used Gross Domestic Product (GDP) growth as key drivers of so much 2 the emissions; existing plans were also used in current activities 2 that generate emissions baseline and projection to the year 2050 is a modeling that offers the Earth is the one that generates the most emissions in the country a starting point for the formulation of the Development Strategy for deforestation and land use change (Figure 6). Figure 6 Multi-sector baseline of GHG emissions 20 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse GasesEmissions in the Forests and Other Land Uses sector They come mainly from the loss of natural forests. les and grassland expanses net and annual gradients. In the period 1990-2010 changes were observed drastic bios in this sector; for the year 2050 it is projected ta a loss of 40% of the remaining forest cover while increasing land for annual crops areas with scattered trees and urbanized territories. the per- loss of forests not only implies an increase in emissions tions by the release of carbon stored in trees and other biomass to capture carbon from the atmosphere. The use of fuels is also essential to project the behavior of GHG emissions. In Guatemala there is a high dependency on imported liquid fuels From cession of firewood as fuel used for cooking and rural heating. GHG emissions from the use of fuels are reflected in the energy supply residential demand and in transportation. The baseline provides information on the main emission sources and identifies in which sectors there are increased opportunities for mitigation. In the summaries sectoral numbers below greater detail of economic activities and emissions tions associated in each sector. This information is also Available in greater detail in the technical document of the Strategy. This process was designed to promote changes bios in activities that generate higher emissions through options that reduce GHG emissions and that contribute significantly to improving the socio-economic conditions economic and environmental aspects of the country. National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 215. Sector Summary Sector Energy Greenhouse gas emissions from the energy sector formulation of the Low Emissions Development Strategy sub-sectors: energy supply (ES) which includes power generation and oil refining and demand at the residential level (RCI) for electricity generation it is projected that from 2030 natural gas will also be used. These fuels emit carbon dioxide (CO) 2 4 (NO) 2 2 the year 2015 2 more than 12 million tons per year 2050 (an increase of 6.5%) and population. Figure 7 GHG emissions baseline of the Electricity Supply subsector National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions 23A RCI level The RCI subsector also demands electricity for lighting These activities are indirectly attributed part of the emissions from electricity generation. The main fuels used at the RCI are: gasoline WHAT 2 4 2 2 This fuel is accounted for in the forest and other land uses sector. The total emissions of the RCI subsector in 2015 are estimated at almost 4 million tons of CO equivalent. By the year 2050 2 that GHG emissions amount to more than 9 million tons of CO equivalent 2 8 shows that the greatest growth occurs in the consumption of electrical energy Figure 8 Summary of GHG emissions based on consumption of the Residential subsector 24 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases Hydroelectric Oxec. The energy sector working group mitigation distributed as follows: five options for mitigation for the electricity generation subsector mitigation for the RCI demand subsector; and subsequently • SE-10/E-2. Increase solar generation incorporated two mitigation options prioritized by the group of urbanism that have direct interference for the sector. The analysis • SE-13/E-3. Increase geothermal power generation of microeconomic impact indicates that if all these options are • SE-16/E-4. Loss reduction through renewable energy implemented in the period 2019-2050 374 million tons of CO e 2 of 26 • RCI-7 / E-6. Energy efficiency in existing buildings during the same period. • RCI-3 / E-7. Labeling standards for household appliances • RCI-10 / E-8. Energy audits • RCI-15/E-9. Low consumption wood stoves The National Energy Plan 2017 – 2032 promotes an energy matrix that prioritizes the use of the • U-3. Change to LED technology of the public lighting system natural resources • U-4. Energy efficiency in new constructions its energy matrix of 54% use of renewable resources variable in 2016 to 64% in 2032. For ease of understanding of the document mitigation options National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 25Figure 9 Marginal abatement cost curve for the Energy Sector | period 2019- 2050 Of the 11 prioritized options use of solar generation potential (E-2) support the transmission system and reduce generation losses (E-4) regulations for labeling standards for low consumption products (E-7) and energy audits (E-8) LED in public lighting system (U-3) are the ones that show the highest profitability Q.200.00 per tonne of CO and reduced. 2 26 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse GasesThe potential for abatement due to the use of low-consumption stoves The 2019 National Energy Efficiency Plan – firewood (E-9) is the measure that presents the most reductions for the sector 2032 made official in 2017 2 technologies for efficiency and energy saving efforts that will optimize the intensity of the guide energy consumption firewood demand in 100 greenhouse effect. in low energy consumption products (E-7) and the increase in potential of the existing hydroelectric plants (E-1) also present a high downside potential of CO and reduced in both cases. 2 Figure 10 Analysis of macroeconomic impacts of the Energy Supply Sector National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 27A macroeconomic level bles replaces the use of fossil fuels. Most of the options have positive impacts by reducing energy costs with re- mitigation measures prioritized in this sector in import substitution; However impact on the flow of foreign currency can be reduced as labor intensive work is required the importation of inputs (such as solar panels) that are not manufactured the generation of employment. locally. In terms of cost generation of renewable energy have a balance of costs and benefits services with higher performance than the continuity of current practices. Figure 11 Analysis of macroeconomic impacts of the Energy Demand Sector 28 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse GasesSector TransportThe formulation process of the transport sector of GHG from the transport sector are generated by the burning of fuels used in vehicles gasoline is used 2 4 and nitrous oxide (NO). 2 The estimation of emissions from the transport sector in 2015 is approximately 9.5 million tons of CO e; following current patterns 2 the 2 of the sector come from land transport Figure 12 Baseline of direct GHG emissions for the Transportation Sector 30 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas EmissionsThe working group prioritized six mitigation options in criteria on social acceptance • T-1. Biental MetroRail. Of the six prioritized options technological changes and one to modifications in fuels. • T-2. Extra-urban public transport. in addition • T-3. Urban public transport the urban planning group transportation tuition. The impact of implementing these eight • T-4. Bypasses of Chimaltenango and Barberena. options would lead to a reduction of 80 million tons • T-5. CO e electric vehicles in the period 2019-2050 2 net to Guatemalan society equivalent to 27 • T-6. Use of ethanol in gasoline nes of quetzals. • U-1. National Urban Development Policy Of the eight prioritized mitigation options • U-2. Sustainable metropolitan mobility the National Policy for Urban Development (U-1) is the one that presents greatest opportunity to reduce emissions for society. Electric vehicles (T-5) and the commuter train For ease of understanding of the document MetroRiel (T-1) of mitigation options National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions 31 Figure 13 Marginal abatement cost curve for the Transport Sector | period 2019- 2050 The prioritized options in this sector show variability of im- The 2020 plan of the Municipality of Guatemala macroeconomic pacts have a positive impact on savings due to energy use. It is promoted by the development of housing corridors option for electric vehicles (T-5) in cost relative to trend to local fuels local and employment generation. kilometers traveled the emissions. Other options such as the implementation of the Mobility Plan tropolitana (U-2) current trend capital adequacy for imports job creation and stimulates local supply chains. 32 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases Figure 14 Analysis of macroeconomic impacts of the Transportation Sector National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 33Sector IndustriaFoto:  Russ Ward - Unsplash.com The formulation process of the EDBE in the industrial sector was leader- during the production of cement rated by the Ministry of Economy (MINECO). GHG emissions emissions of other greenhouse gases from from the industrial sector are generated from three main sources: hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) used in refrigerants; However for this exercise 1) Direct emissions from fuel burning in furnaces process slowers ac and other end uses of energy transmission and distribution. Figure 15 presents the emissions of the industrial sector and with transparency 2) Direct emissions from industrial processes chemical or physical transformation of raw materials to metals chemicals For the year 2015 3) Indirect emissions from electricity consumption in ins- ron at 4.7 million tons of CO equivalent. It is projected that 2 plants and industrial equipment this figure will increase to almost 9.5 million tons by 2030 (increase increasing more than 100% in relation to 2015) and 16.7 million Direct greenhouse gas emissions from this sector in tons by 2050 (with an increase of 200% compared to 2015) come from carbon dioxide (CO) 2 4 trose (N O) from the consumption and burning of petroleum coke 2 bunker industry. CO emissions from industrial processes 2 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 35 Figure 15 Baseline of GHG emissions of the Industry Sector The industry sector working group prioritized six mitigation options based on potential impacts to competitiveness gicos 2 in the period 2019-2050 36 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions • I-1. Efficient ovens • I-4. Improvement of electrical energy efficiency • I-2. boilers • I-3. Use of renewable energy for self-consumption • I-6. Improved heat recovery For ease of understanding of the document Figure 16 Marginal abatement cost curve for the Industry Sector | period 2019- 2050 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 37 Figure 16 presents the impacts of the implementation of these in 2017 options in terms of profitability towards Guatemalan society teak 2 the six options considered net for society in its implementation Energy efficiency in ovens (I-1) and other equipment (I-2) heat recovery (I-6) Renewable energy generation options for self-consumption with the support of international standards. mo (I-3) and the one with the highest efficiency in electrical energy (I-4) are the showing the highest profitability. In the case of generating renewable energy would result in savings of Q.190.00 per ton CO and reduced (I-3) 2 in electrical energy (I-4) would generate savings of approximately Q.110.00 per tonne of CO and reduced. 2 The Ministry of Economy of the National Quality System the National Quality Policy that aims to objective to improve the conditions of national trade and international business and consumer protection. All the options in this sector show positive impacts on the employment generation energy in the form of electricity or fuels. It is identified that three of the six options represent a lower cost to maintain the course current; However orients the flow of foreign exchange towards imports since it is necessary acquire new foreign-made equipment. Photo: Ministry of Energy and Mines 38 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions Figure 17 Analysis of macroeconomic impacts of the Industry Sector National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 39Sector farming and Livestock Photo: Gerson Quevedo Greenhouse gas emissions from the agriculture/livestock sector are generated by the application of nitrogen (NO) to the soil 2 It comes from fertilizers for crops or from the manure deposited by grazing animals. Another source of emissions in this sector is the methane (CH) that is generated by enteric fermentation 4 farm. CH and N O emissions from the burning of agricultural residues are accounted for 4 2 (CO ) from the burning process are assumed to be captured in a neutral cycle 2 carbon or remove carbon dioxide (CO) from the atmosphere 2 tion of the Low Emissions Development Strategy for Guatemala Livestock and Food (MAGA). Figure 18 Baseline of GHG emissions of the Agriculture Sector National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 41In 2015, emissions from the sector totaled 10 million Photo: Luis Ríos tons of CO e 2 million tons and by 2050 of 15 million tons mainly mainly due to the growth of the population that demands more amount of food. Through a process of consultation and discussion with the participants of the sector work table cation They are geared towards livestock. The implementation of these seven op- tions would represent a reduction of 753 million tons of CO and in the period 2019-2050 2 million quetzales for Guatemalan society. • AG-1. soil conservation • AG-2. agroforestry systems • AG-3. woody fruit plantations • AG-4. Efficient use of nitrogen fertilizers • GAN-1. Improved pastures and rational grazing • GAN-2. Silvopastoral systems • GAN-3. Comprehensive manure management For ease of understanding of the document of mitigation options 42 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions Figure 19 Marginal abatement cost curve for the Agriculture and Livestock Sector | period 2019- 2050 The main opportunity to reduce emissions in this sector is in the removal of carbon through the introduction of trees The National Strategy for Sustainable Bovine Livestock to silvopastoral systems (GAN-2) and the establishment of plantations with Low Emissions made official in 2018 woody fruit crops (AG-3). With the implementation of these, it is an instrument of the Bovine Livestock Policy. two options tons of CO e. in terms of savings 2 improved pastures (GAN-1) cattle ranching at the national level in order to million quetzals achieve productive farming saving Q241.00 for each ton of CO e avoided. 2 va National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 43 The most notorious macroeconomic impacts in this sector are in the generation of employment; since all options have positive impacts on this variable. Most sector options strengthen local supply chains and reduce outward capital flows by require fewer imports. Implementation of mitigation options for the livestock subsector positive Figure 20 Analysis of macroeconomic impacts of the Agriculture and Livestock Sector 44 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse GasesPhoto: Xiomara Lima Sector Forests and others land uses Photo: Liz AlburezNatural Forest GHG emissions in the forest sector and other land uses come from deforestation of forests land use change. Forests are sinks that store carbon in trees and other species Therefore, the loss of forests or their degradation implies that the carbon retained is released into the atmosphere through GHG emissions. that the growth of forests implies removal of carbon. It is estimated that for the year 2015 the sector's emissions totaled 71 million tons of CO e 2 The working groups of this sector were led by the National Institute of Forests (INAB) and the National Council of Protected Areas (CONAP) because forest lands in Guatemala are located inside and outside protected areas. 46 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases Figure 21 Baseline of GHG emissions of the Forest Sector and other land uses The working group of the forest sector and other land uses ruffled five mitigation options according to their technical feasibility political feasibility 2 of microeconomic impacts reflects that the implementation of GHG emission reductions presents is the conservation and management five mitigation options would reduce 1 tons of CO e in the period 2019-2050 2 2 combination of avoided emissions and direct removals. The implementation National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 47 PROBOSQUE Incentive Programs Decre- • B-1. Forest plantations to 2-2015 and PINPEP Decree 51-2010 forestry activity in the country protection and restoration of the natural base • B-3. Restoration of degraded areas lan social participation economic mitigation and adaptation to the effects of climate change • U-5. urban forest plantations matic of risks to natural disasters and the governance of the forests. For ease of understanding of the document of mitigation options Figure 22 Marginal abatement cost curve for the Forests and other land uses sector | period 2019- 2050 48 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases The macroeconomic analysis in this sector identified that the implementation of prioritized mitigation options entails higher costs in com- comparison with current practices. However Figure 23 Analysis of macroeconomic impacts of the Forest Sector and other land uses National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 49Sector Waste solids and liquids Greenhouse gas emissions from the waste sector come mainly from the decomposition of organic matter in landfills for the incineration of waste and for the treatment of municipal and industrial wastewater. The process for this sector was led by the Ministry Environment and Natural Resources (MARN) Direct emissions from the sector come from the decomposition of urban solid waste (MSW) in landfills and municipal wastewater. I know It is estimated that by 2015 the sector emitted 2 million tons of CO and if the current management pattern is followed by 2050 this amount will last 2 will apply Emissions in this sector increase as the amount of solid and liquid waste managed without proper processes grows. With the aim of promoting improvements in the environmental management of waste and stabilizing the increase in GHG emissions of the sector prioritized six mitigation options that, according to the microeconomic analysis carried out options would reduce 186 million tons of CO e in the period 2019-2050 2 8 Figure 24 Baseline of GHG emissions of the Solid and liquid waste sector National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions 51• D-1. Expansion and efficiency in solid waste collection • D-4. Use of methane in landfills • D-2. Reuse and recycling of waste • DL-1. Saving water • D-3. Composting • DL-2. Sewage treatment For ease of understanding of the document Figure 25 Marginal abatement cost curve for the Solid and liquid waste sector | period 2019- 2050 52 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse GasesPhoto: Xiomara Lima The main reduction in emissions in this sector is details directly in the transport sector focuses on generating improvements in the efficiency of collection services (D-1) reuse and recycling of inorganic waste (D- two). The implementation of water saving measures waste involves high costs bios for saving the use of a resource with a cost not yet defined in Guatemala. Five of the six prioritized mitigation options have minor economic impacts on the behavior current lie of wastewater saving measures It has a positive impact on job creation. The implementation of the mitigation option for the use of methane energy in landfills (D-4) reduce energy expenses of supply and intensifies the demand for labor construction site The National Policy for the Management of Waste and Solid Waste bernativo 281-2015 than integral in the management of solid waste read its final disposition address changes in behavior in the pro- duction of these wastes will have repercussions in minimizing the ne- tives to health and the environment. National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions 53 Figure 26 Analysis of macroeconomic impacts of the Solid and Liquid Waste Sector 54 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions6. Integration of Policy options Figure 27 presents the marginal abatement cost curve (MAC curve included in the Low Emissions Development Strategy. The MAC curve makes it easy to compare each of the 43 options of according to its potential to reduce GHG emissions and the cost effectiveness equivalent carbon. Unlike the sectoral MAC curves presented in the previous chapter that might exist between the mitigation options of the different sectors. Namely has an impact on mitigation options in the energy sector Note that this MAC curve presents information on two variables for each mitigation option. Although some mitigation options tion involve an investment cost environment to be considered. National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 557. Strategy Impacts The implementation of the mitigation options of the strategy of development with low emissions will allow the country to continue in its development path while reducing the intensity of its emissions. greenhouse gas emissions. It is estimated that in the period 2019-2050 would be reduced by 2 2 by reducing the use of fossil fuels of forests waste. In addition society would be 41 be allocated to actions that benefit the living conditions of the Guatemalans. • Deforestation avoided by 2030: 595 twice the size of the department of Guatemala) • Deforestation avoided by 2050: 1.2 million hectares (equi- It is worth the size of the apartments in Retalhuleu quez • Forest planted by 2030: 227 from the department of Guatemala • Forest planted by 2050: 715 the size of Saint Mark • Gasoline use avoided by 2030 – 58.6 Million Gallons • Gasoline use avoided by 2050 - 65.1 Million Gallons • By 2030, fuel use avoided is equivalent to 685 million gallons of gasoline • By 2050, fuel use avoided is equivalent to 1 ns of gallons of gasoline 56 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse GasesImplementation of the National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions will support Guatemala to achieve environmental goals social mitigation and forests and other land uses adaptation to climate change energetic ity efficiency of natural resources and environmental conditions in general; what's more soil evacuation. The strategy will contribute in the medium and long term to reduce the vulnerability of the country society more adapted to the climatic variability induced by the climate change. 8. route to follow The 43 mitigation options presented in this strategy pro- provide inputs to guide decision-making in the direction of a more efficient economy meet the challenges of climate change. The detailed analysis of each mitigation option allows visualization ize the impact of the implementation of the Strategy on each productive sector of the country in question of GHG emissions. This im- pact is presented in Figure 28 below. projection of GHG emissions by 2050 in a BAU scenario (following the current behavior) emissions would grow approximately in 203 million tons of CO e per year. Below the dotted line 2 to know of emissions by sector under the scenario of implementation of the 43 mitigation options of the Development Strategy with Casualties emissions mind 2 to the year 2050. National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 57 Figure 28 Impact of the Development Strategy with Low Emissions on the base line of GHG emissions These results also allow us to analyze how and in what way under the dotted line magnitude the Low Emissions Development Strategy contributes to the reduction of emissions under the scenario of implementation of compliance with the country's international commitments in relation to the Low Emissions Development Strategy. A reduction of relation to the goals of the Nationally Determined Contribution 11% according to this projection (reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 11% of the country from 140 million tons of CO e in the scenario 2 with own funds and 22% with cooperation support). Figure BAU to 125 million tons of CO e in the year 2030. For 2 29 presents the projection of GHG emissions to the year 2050 under reaching a 22% reduction BAU scenario (following current behavior patterns) 2 58 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions43 mitigation options prioritized in the Development Strategy In the introduction to this document with Low Emissions tons of CO e in the year 2030 2 44% sectoral companies By the year 2050, an 11% reduction in the country's emissions. Assessment of its impact on the economy. would imply lowering from 203 to 181 million tons of CO e. The one with the tools to guide the country on the decoupling route. 2 reduction of 22% to 2050 tons of CO e. The implementation of the Development Strategy The results of the technical and economic analyzes within the Es- 2 Development with Low Emissions to the year 2050 59% of projected emissions tons of CO e. reduction of GHG emissions and in the many co-benefits 2 Figure 29 Contribution of the Low Emissions Development Strategy with the goals of the NDC of Guatemala and the Paris Agreement 200 And 2 O C And d 150 s a d a the n the 100 T And d s And n the 50 ill M 0 1990  2000  2010  2020  2030  2040  2050 TREND SCENARIO NDC 11% NDC 22% IMPLEMENTING THE OPTIONS (BAU) OF ALL SECTORS National Development Strategy with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 59 and environmental effects that would be obtained through the 43 mitigation options. cation. Implementation of the strategy will require coordination multisectoral collaboration within the work tables. Although the 43 options of mitigation vary greatly between and within sectors required for its implementation are mostly similar: a facilitating framework mainly by the Government of Guatemala with participation of the corresponding sectors; investment from sources public and practices; participation of civil society to ensure that the benefits and co-benefits of the actions are maximized and dis- equitably distributed; and capacity building research and training through the country's universities. Added to this coordination is the banking financial relations of the country green product financing benefit the implementation of mitigation practices and technologies prioritized in the strategy. Guatemalan private banking and some credit cooperatives have no business mechanisms to the implementation of the strategy became energy efficiency. In most cases with financing terms of 1–5 years leases with option to purchase for solar panels and machi- high efficiency water. in the public sector incentives such as the Forestry Incentive Program for Possessors of small extensions of land suitable for forestry or agroforestry (PINPEP) and those stipulated by the Law to promote establishment peration in Guatemala (PROBOSQUE Law) present implementation mechanisms for mitigation options. tion in the Forests and Other Land Use sectors The Low Emissions Development Strategy 60 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases which allows further expansion of financing mechanisms available by the same sectors that will have a positive impact on the country development. Two years after starting this participatory and multisectoral process, torial economic growth with low emissions – a route to a de- cleaner roll climate change and that supports the country in its compliance with frameworks national laws and international commitments. Thank you new strongly involving public sector participants private tower route and to establish a joint vision for a more competitive country efficient and prosperous. National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 619. Mitigation options for the reduction of GHG emissions from the Sectors: Energy Attachments Industry ENERGY SECTOR Lead Ministry Prioritized Options Simplified Name SE-9/E-1. Management of permits and locations for increase- SE-9/E-1. Increase the potential of hydroelectric harness the potential of existing hydroelectric plants SE-10/E-2. Expand the use of the potential of SE-10/E-2. Increase solar generation solar generation SE-13/E-3. Expand the use of generation potential by SE-13/E-3. Increase geo-energy generation geothermal energy and development of thermal geothermal energy SE-16/E-4. New renewable generators to support the SE-16/E-4. Reduction of losses through energy transmission system and reduce losses in renewable energy generation SE-21/E-5. Development of mini and micro hydroelectric SE-21/E-5. Development of mini and micro hydroelectric Ministry of energy RCI-7 / E-6. Energy conservation guides in buildings- RCI-7 / E-6. Energy efficiency in existing buildings and Mines (MEM) RCI-3/E-7. Labeling standards for products with low RCI-3/E-7. Labeling standards for electrode- domestic energy consumption RCI-10 / E-8. Energy audits RCI-10 / E-8. Energy audits RCI-15/E-9. Use of low-consumption wood stoves RCI-15/E-9. Low consumption wood stoves U-3. Change to LED technology of the public lighting system- U-3. Change to LED technology in the lighting system public within the framework of a Smart City vision of the AMCG public brado U-4. Incorporate energy efficiency parameters in the U-4. Energy efficiency in new constructions National Building Code 62 National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases TRANSPORTATION SECTOR Lead Ministry Prioritized Options Simplified Name T-1. Expand AMCG's public transportation infrastructure T-1. MetroRiel through the construction of the MetroRiel commuter train T-2. Improve the extra-urban public transport equipment. T-2. Extra-urban public transport. T-3. Increase the service level of urban public transport T-3. urban public transport non-BRT of the municipality of Guatemala Ministry of T-4. Improvement of the road infrastructure of the country in the free T-4. Bypasses of Chimaltenango and Barberena. Communications Infrastructure and T-5. Renewal of the private vehicle fleet towards T-5. Electric vehicles more efficient alternatives Housing (MICIVI) T-6. Promote the use of ethanol in gasoline in Guatemala T-6. Use of ethanol in gasoline U-1. Propose a model of Territorial Urban Structure with base U-1. National Urban Development Policy emissions in the National Urban Development Policy U-2. Sustainable metropolitan mobility plan for the city U-2. Sustainable metropolitan mobility from Guatemala National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 63INDUSTRY SECTOR Lead Ministry Prioritized Options Simplified Name I-1. Energy efficiency in ovens I-1. efficient ovens I-2. Energy efficiency programs for the industrial sector I-2. boilers I-3. Renewable energy incentives for the industrial sector I-3. Use of renewable energy for self-consumption Ministry of Economy (MINECO) I-4. Improvement of electrical energy efficiency in the sector I-4. Improvement of electrical energy efficiency industrial I-5. Mitigation of emissions in the industrial sector through I-5. Increased recycling and/or substitution of materials increased recycling and/or substitution of materials I-6. Improvement of heat recovery in the industrial sector I-6. Improved heat recovery 64 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions FORESTS AND OTHER LAND USE SECTOR Leading institutions Prioritized options Simplified name FOLU-1. Establishment FOLU-1. Forest plantations Forest plantations FOLU-2 National Institute. Promote conservation and sustainable management of FOLU-2. Forest conservation and management natural forests of Forests (INAB) and FOLU-3. Reforestation of degraded areas with the FOLU-3 National Council. Restoration of degraded areas native species of Protected Areas FOLU-4. Strengthen institutional response capacity in FOLU-4. Fire control and prevention (CONAP) prevention and control of forest fires U-5. System of metropolitan green areas U-5. urban forest plantations National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 65 AGRICULTURE AND LIVESTOCK SECTOR Lead Ministry Prioritized Options Simplified Name AG-1. Sustainable soil management AG-1. soil conservation AG-2. Establishment and improvement of systems AG-2. agroforestry systems agroforestry Ministry of AG-3. Establishment of plantations with fruit potential farming Livestock and potential to increase the carbon stock. AG-4 power supply. Efficient use of AG-4 nitrogen fertilizers. Efficient use of nitrogen fertilizers (ITSELF) GAN-1. Promote the establishment of improved pastures and GAN-1. Improved pastures and rational grazing its management under rational grazing GAN-2. Promote the establishment of silvopastoral systems GAN-2. Silvopastoral systems GAN-3. Promote the integral management of manure in systems GAN-3. Comprehensive manure management intensive animal production 66 National Strategy for Development with Low Greenhouse Gas Emissions SOLID AND LIQUID WASTE SECTOR Lead Ministry Prioritized Options Simplified Name D-1. Establishment and expansion of collection services and D-1. Expansion of waste collection services efficiency of solid solid waste transport routes D-2. Reuse and recycling of inorganic solid waste D-2. Reuse and recycling of waste Ministry of D-3. Composting D-3. composting Environment and Resources Natural (MARN) D-4. Landfill Methane Energy Programs D-4. Use of methane in landfills DL-1. Measures for industrial sectors DL-1. Saving water residential DL-2. Technologies for water treatment DL-2. Sewage treatment National Strategy for Development with Low Emissions of Greenhouse Gases 67 MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES www.marn.gob.gt